RESEARCH ARTICLE
Mechano-logical model ofC. elegansgerm line suggests
feedback on the cell cycle
Kathryn Atwell1,2, Zhao Qin3, David Gavaghan1, Hillel Kugler2,4, E. Jane Albert Hubbard3,* and
James M. Osborne1,2,5,*
ABSTRACT
The Caenorhabditis elegans germ line is an outstanding model
system in which to study the control of cell division and differentiation.
Although many of the molecules that regulate germ cell proliferation
and fate decisions have been identified, how these signals interact
with cellular dynamics and physical forces within the gonad remains
poorly understood. We therefore developed a dynamic, 3Din silico
model of theC. elegansgerm line, incorporating both the mechanical
interactions between cells and the decision-making processes within
cells. Our model successfully reproduces key features of the germ
line during development and adulthood, including a reasonable
ovulation rate, correct sperm count, and appropriate organization of
the germ line into stably maintained zones. The model highlights a
previously overlooked way in which germ cell pressure may influence
gonadogenesis, and also predicts that adult germ cells might be
subject to mechanical feedback on the cell cycle akin to contact
inhibition. We provide experimental data consistent with the latter
hypothesis. Finally, we present cell trajectories and ancestry
recorded over the course of a simulation. The novel approaches
and software described here link mechanics and cellular decision-
making, and are applicable to modeling other developmental and
stem cellsystems.
KEY WORDS:C. elegans, Contact inhibition, Germ line, Mechanics,
Modeling, Stem cell
INTRODUCTION
Controlled cell proliferation and fate decisions underlie development,
tissue maintenance, regeneration and repair. Although tremendous
progress has been made identifying the molecular pathways that
regulate division and differentiation in individual cells, less is known
about how the behavior of cell populations is coordinated within a
developing organ. During organogenesis, cells are influenced by a
complex interplay between intrinsic molecular processes, external
signals and mechanical forces. Unraveling the contribution of each
component is experimentally challenging.
Here, we present a computational model ofC. elegansgermline
development and maintenance, a practical experimental system.
Hermaphrodite gonadogenesis is summarized in Fig. 1, and takes
place primarily over the larval life cycle stages L1-L4 (Fig. 1A). Our
simulations begin immediately after the establishment of two
separate gonad arms at the end of L2 (Fig. 1B). A distal tip cell
(DTC), positioned at the end of each gonad arm, performs leader
cell and signaling roles, both during gonadogenesis and in
adulthood (Kimble and Hirsh, 1979; Kimble and White, 1981).
During the L3 and L4 larval stages, germ cells rapidly divide. The
pressure generated by these divisions contributes to the anterior-
posterior growth of the organ, as does active DTC migration
(Kimble and White, 1981; Killian and Hubbard, 2005). As the
DTCs move further from the center of the animal, proximal germ
cells go out of range of their proliferation-promoting/differentiation-
inhibiting signal and enter meiosis (Fig. 1B, green cells). During L4,
the proximal-most meiotic cells differentiate as spermatocytes,
each producing four sperm. In adults, oogenic germ cells either
undergo apoptosis in the turn or develop into oocytes (Gumienny
et al., 1999). With the exception of spermatogonia, sperm and
the proximal-most oocytes,‘germ cells’ are technically syncytial,
as they retain a small opening onto the rachis, a central
cytoplasmic reservoir that streams material into maturing oocytes
(Fig. 1C) (Wolke et al., 2007). However, because germ nuclei are
surrounded by their own cytoplasm and do not appear to share
cytoplasmic components, they are referred to as ‘germ cells’
(Hirsh et al., 1976).
Germ cells are prevented from entering prophase of meiosis I
within the first∼13 cell diameters (CD) of the DTC in L3 larvae
(20-25CD in adults) (Hansen et al., 2004). The DTC expresses at
least two membrane bound DSL family ligands, LAG-2 and APX-1,
which activate the GLP-1 (Notch family) receptor on nearby germ
cells. Downstream, GLP-1 acts via LAG-1 to inhibit the
accumulation of specific RNA-binding proteins, preventing
meiotic entry (reviewed by Hansen and Schedl, 2013; Kershner
et al., 2013).
Many system-level questions about the germ line remain
unanswered. For example, what is the precise interplay between
GLP-1 activity, cell cycle and meiotic entry? What are the properties
of the germ cell cycle, and how do these alter with age and
environmental conditions? Given that the two known DTC-
expressed ligands are membrane bound, what determines when
and where a germ cell enters meiosis? How does gonad structure
affect germ cells, and how do germ cells, in turn, influence
gonadogenesis? In silico models provide a complementary
approach to laboratory experiments for investigating these
questions.
Several previous models of theC. elegans germ line have been
published. Setty et al. (2012) presented a 2D model of a lengthwise
section through the adult gonad, with germ cells represented by
Received 13 May 2015; Accepted 17 September 2015
1Computational Biology Group, Department of Computer Science, University
of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QD, UK.2Biological Computation Group, Computational
Science Laboratory, Microsoft Research Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK.
3Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Kimmel
Center for Stem Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA.
4Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 5290002,
Israel. 5School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne
3010, Australia.
*Authors for correspondence ( jane.hubbard@med.nyu.edu,
jmosborne@unimelb.edu.au)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
3902
© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd| Development (2015) 142, 3902-3911 doi:10.1242/dev.126359
DEVELOPMENT

circles restricted to an underlying lattice. The behavior of each germ
cell in response to stimuli was modeled using a statechart– a visual
formalism similar to a state machine or flowchart that specifies (1)
the possible states of a cell, (2) the allowed transitions between states
and (3) the conditions under which these occur (Harel, 1987). The
Setty et al. model accurately reproduced mutant phenotypes and
provided predictions concerning proliferative zone stability that
were experimentally validated. Beyer et al. (2012) modeled a similar
2D section through the adult gonad using off-lattice cell mechanics.
Off-lattice models have no underlying grid, and cells are allowed to
move freely in space according to the force applied by their
neighbors.
Here we present a combined‘mechano-logical’ model of the
germ line that incorporates newin vivomeasurements and extends
previous work in important ways. First, our approach combines a
statechart description of germ cell behavior with 3D cell mechanics.
Second, we take into account the rachis. Third, we cover both larval
development and adult homeostasis in a single simulation. We
found that introducing two new hypotheses into the model greatly
facilitated agreement with experimental measurements. The first
was gonadal‘stretching’ during late L4. The second was mechanical
feedback on adult germ cell proliferation akin to contact inhibition.
We examined a scenario in which distal cells become more tightly
packed, and obtained results consistent with a contact inhibition
mechanism in vivo. Finally, we incorporated the means to perform
cell tracking and clonal labelingin silico, to facilitate interpretation
of future experimental results.
RESULTS
Model overview
We begin by summarizing the model (see Materials and Methods
and supplementary materials and methods for further details).
The germ line was simulated using off-lattice mechanics, such
that cells move freely under the influence of applied forces rather
than being confined to boxes in an underlying grid. Individual
germ cells were modeled as spheres, with a repulsion force exerted
whenever two cells overlap (Fig. 2A). The approach is similar to
that of Dunn et al. (2013); see also supplementary materials and
methods. We used an existing modeling library, Chaste (Cancer
Heart and Soft Tissue Environment) (Mirams et al., 2013), to
which was added new code to model the growing gonad and to
allow the use of statecharts. Code for both new features is freely
available under an open source license (see Materials and
Methods).
We simulated a single gonad arm, as both arms are symmetric.
Germ cells were confined by a‘boundary condition’: a surface
representing the gonad membrane that cells cannot cross. The
boundary is tube-shaped and was updated over time, forming along
the path of the DTC. The DTC itself was explicitly modeled and
migrated along a prescribed path over the course of the simulation
(Fig. 2B). To ensure continued contact between proliferating germ
cells and the migrating DTC (Starich et al., 2014), the DTC makes
migratory progress only when germ cells abut the DTC. If DTC
migration outpaced germ cell proliferation by one cell diameter (a
situation that was minimized by our choice of larval proliferation
rate) DTC migration paused temporarily. Our strategy of linking
boundary growth to the DTC path allows changes in DTC migration
to affect gonad morphology. For instance, if DTC migration is
delayed during L3 owing to inadequate germ cell proliferation, the
turn still occurs at the same prescribed time in the simulation, but
closer to the center of the animal, consistent with experimental
observations (e.g. Austin and Kimble, 1987; Killian and Hubbard,
2004).
To determine the proper gonad size and growth rate,
measurements were obtained from micrographs of larvae at
various stages of development. The measured animals were
grown at 20°C with abundant food; these are the conditions our
model aims to reflect. A target DTC migration rate was calculated
Fig. 1.C. elegansgermline
development and organization.
(A) TheC. eleganslife cycle. Larval
development is subdivided into four
stages; at each stage the growing
gonad is indicated in gray (not to scale).
(B) A cartoon of germline development
within the gonad (not to scale, under-
represented cell counts from L2
onwards). The DTCs and somatic
gonadal tissues are pale blue, with the
central oval representing multiple cells
and sheath cells omitted. Germ cells
are color coded as follows: proliferating
and meiotic S cells are yellow, meiotic
cells are green, sperm are dark blue,
and oocytes are red. (C) A cartoon
depicting germ cell connections to the
rachis. (D) Micrograph (composite of a
distal and a proximal image) of a single
early adult gonad arm, for comparison
with drawings. The gonad arm and
proximal-most oocyte are outlined.
When the first oocyte is ovulated,
sperm are pushed into the
spermatheca. Scale bar: 25 µm.
3903
RESEARCH ARTICLE Development (2015) 142, 3902-3911 doi:10.1242/dev.126359
DEVELOPMENT

for each simulation stage (Fig. S1). The same measurements also
revealed that the proximal gonad lengthens significantly during L4,
growth that cannot be captured by moving the DTC alone. This
gonad ‘stretching’ (discussed below) was included in the model by
gradually moving the boundary turn away from the center of the
animal in late L4. Finally, the rachis was taken into account by
forcing cells distal to and within the turn to lie just inside the
boundary edge, creating a space corresponding to the rachis in the
center of the arm. Gonad diameter increased appropriately over
time, based on our measurements.
A statechart associated with each cell controlled fate decisions
and cell cycle progression (Fig. 2C; supplementary materials
and methods). Statecharts are a visual method for specifying the
behavior of complex systems (Harel, 1987). Similar to a set of
multilayered flowcharts, they contain states (boxes) that can be
either active or inactive. Transitions (arrows) dictate how the
currently active state is allowed to change. Next to each transition
is a condition (in square brackets) that must be met for it to
occur.
At the start of the simulation, 16 germ cells are present and
their active states are those outlined in red in Fig. 2C. At each
subsequent time step, the statechart is checked to see whether
conditions exist allowing a transition out of any current state. If
so, that transition happens immediately and the state changes.
Transition conditions may include dependencies, allowing state
changes in response to a cell’s position in the gonad or the time post-
hatching. When a cell divides, it inherits its parent’s state. See
Movie 1 and supplementary materials and methods for further
details on model progression.
Our statechart incorporates several hypotheses about how germ
cells react to their environment. First, cells born sufficiently close to
the DTC are proliferative, and they and their daughter cells may not
enter meiosis within 70 µm (∼13 cell diameters) of the distal tip.
Beyond this point, cells irreversibly enter meiosis at the earliest
opportunity, within the cell cycle constraints described below.
Seventy microns is the approximate distance at which initial meiotic
entry occurs in the mid-L3; therefore, this approach represents a
simple spatial threshold model of DTC signaling. We further
Fig. 2. The computational model.(A) Cell mechanics. Overlapping cells experience a repulsion force, and the net force on a cell along with its drag coefficient
determines movement at each time step. (B) Growth of the gonad boundary. The DTC (blue) migrates in a U-shape, turning at a prescribed time. The boundary
at timet consists of all points a distancer(t) from the DTC path, wherer(t) is the gonad radius. Germ cells are restricted to this domain. The model simulates
a single gonad arm; the other arm is outlined in gray. (C) The statechart governing germ cell behavior. Dotted lines separate the orthogonal regions ofthe chart,
which deal with different processes and update simultaneously. Each box represents a cell state and arrows indicate the allowed transitions betweenthem.
Alongside each transition in square brackets is the condition for it to occur. Red states are initially active in cells at the start of the simulation.Mitosis has no initial
state, because cells begin the simulation in a randomly chosen cell cycle phase. Daughter cells inherit their parent’s state upon division. Blue text indicates actions
that occur on transition or while in a certain state. The biological hypotheses this statechart represents are discussed in the text.
3904
RESEARCH ARTICLE Development (2015) 142, 3902-3911 doi:10.1242/dev.126359
DEVELOPMENT

specified that commitment to meiotic entry must occur during G1; if
not, germ cells undergo one further division. Recent studies, the
results of which were not available during our model building,
demonstrate experimental support for a very similar general
mechanism (Fox and Schedl, 2015). Fox and Schedl (2015) show
that cells in mitotic S or G2 complete one final round of division
before entering meiosis, indicating that the meiotic entry decision
must occur before pre-meiotic S phase. As G1 is very short in this
system, these results further imply that the decision to enter meiosis
occurs in the previous cell cycle. However, the experimental results
do not preclude the possibility that the meiotic entry decision occurs
during the very short G1 of the same cell cycle, as we have modeled
here. Nevertheless, consistent with the results of Fox and Schedl
(2015), the mechanism modeled here links the meiotic entry
decision to GLP-1 activity and to the cell cycle, such that cells
experiencing low GLP-1 activity divide once, then enter meiosis.
The only exception would be very rare cases where a cell is in the
short G1 exactly when GLP-1 activity drops, in which case the cell
would enter meiosis from G1 without an intervening division.
The sperm/oocyte decision is simply triggered by distance from
the DTC (200 µm). Cells arriving at this position before a threshold
time become sperm-fated, whereas cells reaching it later are oocyte-
fated. Finally, for reasons discussed below, mechanical feedback
akin to contact inhibition was included in the cell cycle model of
adult germ cells. This feedback was applied by transiently arresting
progress through the cell cycle in cells compressed to <70% of their
rest volume (see supplementary materials and methods). The
remainder of the results section explores the impact these
hypotheses had on the simulated germ line.
Reproducing essential features of germline development
Using the parameters set in Table S1, our simulations qualitatively
resemble the wild-type germ line throughout development and into
adulthood. Fig. 3 shows a series of simulation snapshots captured at
key points (see also Movie 1 and Table S2). They show that the
model reproduced the overall structure of the germ line: a
proliferative zone was established, meiotic cells appeared at the
appropriate time, sperm and oocytes were produced in roughly
correct numbers, and the organization of the germ line was stably
maintained for several days. Importantly, we were able to achieve
these results using biologically reasonable parameters and gonad
dimensions, and without biasing cell movement with respect to the
DTC as in previous work (Setty et al., 2012). Notably, the direction
of germ cell movement naturally reversed in the simulation after
DTC migration was complete.
We fit simulation output to quantitative experimental data across
a range of properties (Fig. 4). Parameters that could not be
determined from the prior literature or from our own measurements
are indicated by an asterisk in Table S1 and were varied during
fitting within estimated feasible ranges. In general, a good
agreement was achieved between simulated and expected cell
counts during development (Fig. 4A-C). The counts of total cells,
proliferative cells, and sperm all increased appropriately, and
proliferative cell numbers were stably maintained in the adult (we
did not attempt to capture the effects of ageing; Qin and Hubbard,
2015). Moreover, a steady ovulation rate was established, indicated
by a falling sperm count (Fig. 4C). The length of the simulated
gonad over time also matched the expected growth curve (Fig. 4D).
This need not have been the case, because DTC movement can be
delayed in our model if germ cells numbers are insufficient to
support migration. The implication is that the rate of germ cell
proliferation used here (a cycle length of 3 h in larvae and 8 h in
adults) is reasonable to support normal gonadogenesis. The exact
length of the germ cell cycle has been controversial in the field
(Kipreos et al., 1996; Crittenden et al., 2006; Fox et al., 2011; Fox
and Schedl, 2015).
There is also a reasonable fit for the length of the‘proliferative
zone’ in CD from the DTC– an estimate of the size of the stem/
progenitor pool. The field defines the proliferative zone or mitotic
region as the area distal to the first row containing two or more
meiotic cells (Fig. 4E). We also benchmarked the proximal-most
row containing a non-meiotic cell (Fig. 4F). Both properties are
close on average to the expected values for the young adult. In
addition, Fig. S2 compares simulated and experimental proliferative
zone lengths in microns. Although the fit could perhaps be
improved further with fine parameter adjustments, the current fit
was considered sufficient to begin investigating overall behavior.
Gonadal stretching during late L4 probably contributes to
gonad morphogenesis
Organ growth is influenced by multiple factors and determining
their relative contribution is experimentally challenging. Two
Fig. 3. Germline simulation snapshots, captured throughout larval
development and at two adult time points.In this simulation, germ cells in
the Mitosis and MeioticS states are represented in yellow, and cells in
Prophase of Meiosis Istate are green. Total cell counts for this particular
simulation are provided in Table S2. Oogenic and spermatogenic cells are
represented in red and pale blue respectively, and mature sperm are dark blue.
The DTC nucleus, where visible, is cyan. A proportion of oogenic cells undergo
programmed cell death (not visible in these snapshots). Parameters as in
Table S1, see also Movie 1.
3905
RESEARCH ARTICLE Development (2015) 142, 3902-3911 doi:10.1242/dev.126359
DEVELOPMENT

independent factors contribute to gonad growth inC. elegans:D T C
migration and the force generated by germ cell proliferation (Kimble
and White, 1981; Killian and Hubbard, 2005). Previous studies have
associated the force generated by germ cells with anterior-posterior
extension of the gonad arms during L2 and L3.
Our experimental measurements highlighted an additional
feature of larval gonadal growth. The proximal region of the
gonad arm doubles in length during late L4, as the turn moves away
from the center of the animal (Table 1, proximal region data). We
specified this stretching in our model (Movie 1). Centrifugal
growth of the proximal gonad over this period is difficult to
attribute to DTC movement. To investigate whether a reasonably
sized gonad could be produced by DTC migration alone, we ran a
simulation with proximal stretching disabled. We calculated that
without stretching, the DTC must travel at 46 µm/h during late L4 to
reproduce normal growth. However, in a simulation using this
migration rate, the DTC pulled ahead of distal germ cells (Fig. 5A).
We therefore ran a second simulation using the same migration rate,
but forcing the DTC to pause whenever it pulled ahead of distal
germ cells. This alternative modeling choice maintained the
proliferative zone, but produced a shortened adult gonad
( F i g .5 B ) .B yc o n t r a s t ,w h e np r o x i m a l‘stretching’ was included
in the model by moving the turn, simulations produced a
reasonably sized gonad, while keeping the organ filled with germ
cells as in vivo (Fig. 5C). We conclude that elongation of the
proximal region during late L4 is a non-negligible component of
normal gonadogenesis. We speculate that germ cells exert pressure
on the turn, forcing the gonad to‘stretch’ during late L4.
Adult proliferative zone homeostasis might require
mechanical feedback
In the course of model building, maintaining a stable number of
proliferative cells in the young adult proved problematic. Initially,
we tried to achieve cell number homeostasis by balancing a fixed
adult cell division rate with a fixed death rate. Fig. 6A,B
demonstrates how this approach failed. These simulations always
produced an unrealistic explosion in the number of proliferative
cells, even when the death rate was increased to the extent that
ovulation was impaired. No germ cell death rate in this range was
sufficient to balance a cell cycle length of 8 h. The same was true for
a longer cell cycle length of 24 h (the longest estimate in the
literature; Crittenden et al., 2006). We also tried introducing
mechanical feedback on cell death by making heavily compressed
germ cells more likely to undergo apoptosis. However, this caused
ovulation to halt following excessive cell death. Of the mechanisms
we have simulated thus far (changing rates of proliferation, of
movement as influenced by cell-cell repulsion, and of cell death),
negative feedback from compression on germ cell proliferation rates
provided the most robust homeostasis.
If mechanical feedback on the cell cycle were to occurin vivo, one
prediction is that tighter packing of cells in the proliferative zone
should slow the cell cycle. We sought an experimental means to
induce tighter packing without manipulating key signaling
pathways that regulate the size, number or fate of cells in the
zone, and then determined whether the mitotic index of these more
densely packed cells was altered. We examined aced-3 mutant in
which oogenic germ cells fail to undergo physiological cell death.
A Total cells
20 40 60 80 100
Time (hph)
0 200 400 600
Cells (count)
B Proliferative cells
20 40 60 80 100
Time (hph)
02 0 0100 400 300
Cells (count)
C Sperm cells
20 40 60 80 100
Time (hph)
0 50 100 150
Cells (count)
F Last row containing
a proliferative cell
20 40 60 80 100
Time (hph)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Distance (CD)
E 1st row containing 2
or more meiotic cells
20 40 60 80 100
Time (hph)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Distance (CD)
D Gonad arm length
20 40 60 80 100 120
Time (hph)
Length (µm)
0 200100 400 300
Fig. 4. Comparing simulated and observed values for various germline properties.Experimental measurements are plotted alongside simulated values
for several properties. In each graph, a solid black line gives the simulated result (mean of 30 runs with a region ±1 s.d. shaded), and red lines represent
experimental data. Solid red lines correspond to time series and dashed lines to a single value found in the literature. Three vertical dotted lines mark the beginning
of L3, L4 and adulthood. Finally, a light gray bar indicates the period where our model switches from larval to adult behavior and parameters. (A-C) Counts of total
germ cells, proliferative cells and sperm, respectively, over time in hours post-hatch (hph). (D) Total length of the gonad arm in microns (µm). (E) Distance in
cell diameters (CD) to the distal-most row containing two or more meiotic cells. (F) Distance in CD to the proximal-most row containing a proliferative cell.
Experimental data taken from the literature (Killian and Hubbard, 2005; Hansen et al., 2004; McCarter et al., 1999) and our own measurements, including those
used to generate the animation by Stupay and Hubbard on Wormatlas (http://www.wormatlas.org/hermaphrodite/germ%20line/Germframeset.html).
3906
RESEARCH ARTICLE Development (2015) 142, 3902-3911 doi:10.1242/dev.126359
DEVELOPMENT

dynamics of mutations affecting cell size could be studiedin silico
(Arur et al., 2009; Korta et al., 2012). Finally, the modeling
approach described here could be applied to other developmental
systems, such as intestinal organoids (Sato et al., 2009).
To conclude, we have developed and tested a detailedin silico
model of theC. elegansgerm line, that combines, for the first time, a
3D mechanics simulation with a statechart model of cell behavior to
generate new predictions. These include a role for germ cell pressure
in multiple aspects of gonadogenesis and possible mechanical
feedback on the adult germ cell cycle.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell mechanics and boundary conditions
The mechanics simulation uses Chaste, an open source biological modeling
library (Mirams et al., 2013). Germ cells were represented as deformable
spheres, and a gonad boundary was imposed that follows DTC migration.
Please see supplementary materials and methods for details on both of these
features.
Intracellular model and progression during a simulation
Whereas the mechanics simulation governs cell movement and death, in
tracellular aspects of the model are governed by a statechart (Fig. 2C;
supplementary materials and methods). The statechart contains orthogonal
regions controlling the cell cycle, response to DTC signaling, and sex
determination. We describe below how each region acts during a simulation.
Germ cells present at the start of the simulation are in the initial states
colored red in Fig. 2C. Thereafter, daughter cells inherit their parent’s state.
In theCellCycle region, cells are initially inMitosis and cycle through the
phases G1, S, G2 and M, dividing on entry into M phase. The transition out of
a phase occurs after a certain time delay. To avoid synchronized cell cycles,
the durations of G1 and G2 are sampled from a normal distribution, with mean
µ and standard deviationsµ (s=0.1). s is a stochasticity parameter, andµ is the
expected phase length. Expected phase lengths are given in Table S1 and
increase between mid-L4 and adulthood. A mechanical feedback mechanism
is applied to adult germ cells only, which transiently arrests progress through
the cell cycle whenever a cell’s volume falls below 70% of its rest value. The
rest volume of a cell is simply the volume of a sphere of the same radius. The
compressed volume is calculated by taking into account deformation due to
neighboring cells (see supplementary materials and methods). For this model,
we chose to delay the cell cycle in G2, as this portion of the cell cycle is
sensitive to other cues such as nutrition (Fukuyama et al., 2006; Michaelson
et al., 2010). Germ cells in the model exit mitosis only when they enter G1
within a region where GLD-1 or GLD-2 is active. Therefore, cells that
complete G1 (that is, are in S or G2) as they enter an active GLD region will
divide once (and only once) prior to becomingNonProliferative. Upon
exiting mitosis, a fixed length G1 and meiotic S occur before the cell enters
meiotic prophase. We note that these cell cycle choices– G2 for sensitivity to
compression and G1 for commitment to meiosis– can be altered in future
versions of the model in response to new experimental results. Meiotic cells
grow steadily, up to a maximum radius of 4 µm.
Several statechart regions deal with the response to LAG-2/APX-1. The
GLP-1 receptor is initiallyUnbound. At <35 µm from the DTC, the GLP-1
receptor becomes Bound. LAG-1 then activates, GLD-1 and GLD-2
inactivate, and the cell remains in mitosis. At≥70 µm from the DTC, the
GLP-1 signal becomesAbsent. LAG-1 switches off, and the GLD pathways
promote meiotic entry.
In the SexDetermination region of the statechart, all cells begin as
Precursors, and make a sperm/oocyte fate decision on reaching 200 µm
from the DTC. If this decision occurs before 32.5 hours post-hatch (hph) the
cell will be sperm-fated, otherwise it is oocyte-fated. After a short delay,
sperm-fated cells divide twice to produce four sperm. Meanwhile, oocyte-
fated cells grow steadily and are considered mature on reaching 10 µm in
radius. For growth rates, see Table S1. Oocyte-fated cells only may be
removed by apoptosis (Jaramillo-Lambert et al., 2007; Gumienny et al.,
1999), which occurs with probabilityP for each hour spent outside the adult
proximal gonad (<250 µm from the DTC).P is given in Table S1. It is
assumed that oocyte-fated cells that reach the proximal gonad are committed
to becoming mature gametes. At the proximal end of the oviduct, oocytes
are removed from the simulation along with one sperm.
Parameter set and software
Table S1 lists parameter values and their sources, and indicates which
parameters were varied during fitting. A 100-h simulation takes 10-12 h on
one core of an Intel Core i5 machine.
To reproduce our results, Chaste and its dependencies must be installed
(https://chaste.cs.ox.ac.uk/trac/wiki/InstallGuides/InstallGuide). Additional
files specific to this project can then be downloaded (https://github.com/
Katwell/ElegansGermline). All code is covered by a three-clause BSD
license; see Chaste website. The model outputs vtu files for visualization in
Paraview (Utkarsh, 2015), and text files from which graphs were generated
in R. Further instructions and scripts are included in the Github download.
Experimental methods
Determining larval gonad dimensions
Worms were grown at 20°C with abundant food. Developmental stage was
determined by vulval morphology. Differential interference contrast images
of live worms were captured, and measured using ImageJ (Schneider et al.,
2012). Fig. S3 shows each measurement, and Table 1 summarizes the
results. In addition, 1 µmz-stacks were obtained from live worms containing
a germ cell membrane GFP marker (xnSi1; Chihara and Nance, 2012) to
estimate the radius of germ cells and of the rachis.
Mitotic index and internuclear distance
In parallel, wild-type andced-3(n717) mutant worms were synchronized,
ethanol fixed and DAPI stained as described by Pepper et al. (2003).
Microscopy and determination of mitotic index were as described by
Michaelson et al. (2010). Internuclear distance index is the distance from the
distal tip to meiotic entry in microns over the distance in CD.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the anonymous referees for insightful comments.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
K.A. wrote the computer model and carried out simulations. Z.Q. carried out the
experimental work. All authors contributed to model development, analysis and
interpretation of data, and preparing the manuscript.
Funding
K.A. and H.K. acknowledge support from Microsoft Research Cambridge. K.A. is
supported by a grant from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC) [EP/G037280/1] to the SABS Industrial Doctoral Centre; and acknowledges
the use of Advanced Research Computing (ARC) resources. E.J.A.H. and Z.Q.
acknowledge support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [R01GM61706 to E.J.
A.H.]. Some strains were provided by theCaenorhabditisGenetics Center, which is
funded by NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Programs [P40 OD010440]. J.M.O.
and D.G. acknowledge support from the EPSRC and Microsoft Research Cambridge
[EP/I017909/1]. Deposited in PMC for immediate release.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://dev.biologists.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1242/dev.126359/-/DC1
References
Arur, S., Ohmachi, M., Nayak, S., Hayes, M., Miranda, A., Hay, A., Golden, A. and
Schedl, T.(2009). Multiple ERK substrates execute single biological processes in
Caenorhabditis elegans germ-line development.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA106,
4776-4781.
Austin, J. and Kimble, J.(1987). glp-1 is required in the germ line for regulation of
the decision between mitosis and meiosis in C. elegans.Cell 51, 589-599.
Barton, K. M. and Kimble, J. (1990). fog-1, a regulatory gene required for
specification of spermatogenesis in the germ line of Caenorhabditis elegans.
Genetics 125, 29-39.
Beyer, A., Eberhard, R., Piterman, N., Hengartner, M. O., Hajnal, A. and Fisher,
J. (2012). Predictive modelling of stem cell differentiation and apoptosis in
C. elegans. InInformation Processing in Cells and Tissues(ed. M. A. Lones, S. L.
3910
RESEARCH ARTICLE Development (2015) 142, 3902-3911 doi:10.1242/dev.126359
DEVELOPMENT

Development • Supplementary information
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information 
 
 
 
Figure S3. Positions at which DIC microscopy images were measured. Corresponds to the 
measurements in Table 1. Dotted lines show the paths drawn onto each DIC image and measured using 
ImageJ. 
  


Development • Supplementary information
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information 
Table S1. Parameter values and sources. All times are given as hours post-hatching. † From our 
measurements of microscopy images of the gonad. * Indicates parameters that were tuned to fit the 
experimental data in Fig. 4. Other parameters were considered fixed based on available data.  
Parameter Value Reference Notes 
Initial conditions: 
Starting time 18.5 hr (Wood et al., 
1980) 
Beginning of L3 
Initial germ cell count 16 (Stupay and 
Hubbard, 
2003) 
 
Initial gonad length 32 μm (Stupay and 
Hubbard, 
2003)  
 
Initial gonad radius 5.48 μm/hr †  
Stretching: 
Rate of stretching 
growth during late L4 
16.2 μm/hr † Based on comparing proximal 
region length at mid L4 and in 
the adult 
Period of stretching 
growth 
31 - 35.5 hr †  
DTC migration:    
L3 moult - mid L3 8.77 μm/hr † Based on change in total 
gonad length 
Mid L3 - L3/L4 moult  7.43 μm/hr † Based on change in total 
gonad length 
L3/L4 moult - mid L4 21.3 μm/hr † Based on change in total 
gonad length 
Mid L4 - young adult 13.6 μm/hr † Change in length – proximal 
growth 
DTC halts 35.5 hr (Stupay and 
Hubbard, 
2003) 
 
Radial growth: 
L3 moult - mid L3 0 μm/hr  Our estimate 
Mid L3 - L3/L4 moult 0.153 μm/hr † Based on average radius 
measurement 
L3/L4 moult - mid L4 0.376 μm/hr † Based on average radius 
measurement 
Mid L4 - young adult 0.74 μm/hr † Based on average radius 
measurement 
Turning: 
Radius of the turn 11.5 μm † Adult proximal & distal arms 
almost touch 

Development • Supplementary information
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information 
Time at start of turning 23 hr (Stupay and 
Hubbard, 
2003) 
 
Cell sizes: 
Mitotic germ cell 
radius 
2.8 μm † Our GFP z stacks put this in 
the 2.5–3.5μm range, taking 
measurements from both 
larval and adult images. 
Meiotic germ cell 
radius 
4 μm (Maddox et 
al., 2005; 
Nadarajan et 
al., 2009) 
Images in these publications 
suggest a 3 -5μm range 
Oocyte radius 10 μm  Oocytes fill the proximal arm 
Sperm radius 1.5 μm (Shakes et 
al., 2011) 
Based on images in this 
publication 
Cell growth rate 1.0 μm/hr *  
Force law:  
Baseline drag 
coefficient η 
1 (Dunn et al., 
2013) 
 
Strength of repulsion  50 *  
Cell cycle: 
Larval cell cycle 
duration 
3 hr (Kipreos et 
al., 1996)* 
Compromise between 
(Kipreos et al., 1996; Lewis 
and Fleming, 1995)  
Adult cell cycle 
duration 
8 hr (Fox et al., 
2011) 
 
Estimated phase 
breakdown 
2% G1 
57% S 
39% G2 
2% M 
(Fox et al., 
2011) 
 
Period over which 
germ cell cycle length 
increases 
31 – 35.5 hr (Korta et al., 
2012) 
After mid L4 but before the 
adult moult 
Other parameters:    
Distance at which 
GLP1 signal becomes 
absent 
70 μm  (Stupay and 
Hubbard, 
2003) 
Approximate position at 
which the first meiotic cell 
appears during development 
Position at which sex 
determination occurs 
200 μm *  
Sperm/oocyte switch 
time 
32.5 hr (Barton and 
Kimble, 
1990) 
Approximate end of the fog-1 
temperature sensitive period 
Sperm production 
delay 
2 hr *  
Distance from the DTC 
at which oocyte growth 
250 μm 
 
 Just beyond the start of the 
proximal arm. Allowing 

Development • Supplementary information
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information 
begins oocyte growth everywhere in 
the proximal arm results in 
large cells blocking the turn.  
Stochasticity s 0.1  Arbitrary, prevents 
synchronised divisions 
Hourly apoptosis  
probability p 
0.025 * Produces sustained ovulation 
with a reasonable rate 
 
 
 
 
Table S2. Cell counts for a single run. These counts apply to the run depicted in Figure 3 of the main text 
only.  
 Time (hours post-hatching)* 
18.5 27.5 30.5 32.5 33.5 35.5 60.5 87.5 
Proliferative 
+ Meiotic S 
(yellow cells) 
16 113 147 184 174 228 366 314 
Proliferative 
- Meiotic S 
 
16 105 112 134 147 177 319 299 
Meiotic S 
 
 
0 8 35 50 27 51 47 15 
Meiotic 
(green cells) 
 
0 8 85 80 76 57 143 178 
Sperm/ 
Spermatogenic 
(blue cells) 
0 0 0 38 38 152 111 47 
Oogenic 
(pink cells) 
 
0 0 0 0 36 69 60 83 
Meiotic + 
Spermatogenic  
+ Oogenic 
0 0 0 118 150 278 314 308 
*In later time points gametes are lost to fertilization. 
 

Development • Supplementary information
Supplementary Materials and Methods 
This section is intended to further clarify certain details of the computational model, 
namely: (1) the mathematics of the cell mechanics model, (2) how the boundary 
condition is implemented, (3) how a statechart updates over time, and (4) how 
mechanical feedback on the cell cycle is applied. 
1) Cell Mechanics
The mechanics simulation uses Chaste, an open source C++ biological modeling 
library ( see Mirams et al., 2013). Each germ cell is represented by a deformable 
sphere. When cells 𝑖 and 𝑗 overlap, cell 𝑖 experiences a repulsion force given by: 
𝐹!" =   𝜇 𝑅! + 𝑅! log 1 −
!!"
!!!!!
𝑟!" , (1)
where 𝑟!"  is the unit vector from 𝑖  to 𝑗, 𝑅!  and 𝑅! are cell radii, 𝑑!"  is the length of the
overlap between the cells, and 𝜇 is a spring strength constant. Given the force law in 
(1), cell positions are updated using forward Euler time stepping and assuming the 
overdamped form of Newton’s second law: 
𝜂 𝑑𝑟
𝑑𝑡 = 𝐹, 
where 𝜂  is a drag coefficient and 𝐹  the net force on the cell found by summing all 
contributions. As a wide range of cell sizes are present in the germ line, we allow cell 
size to affect movement by increasing the drag coefficient linearly with cell radius. 
The final update equation for cell positions is: 
𝑟
!
!"# = 𝑟!
!"# + 𝑑𝑡 𝜂𝑅!
5
!!
𝐹!" ,
!
where 𝜂  is a drag coefficient appropriate for cells of radius 5 µm (Dunn et al., 2013).
2) Boundary Condition
Germ cells are confined to the gonad by a boundary that updates over time. To 
capture gonad growth, we explicitly model DTC migration and form a tubular 
boundary along its path. The DTC migrates in three prescribed stages; first travelling 
in a straight line along the ventral surface of the worm, turning onto the dorsal surface 
during the L3/L4 molt, then migrating back into the center of the animal and halting 
during the adult molt. The DTC’s target speed is fixed for each simulation stage, 
based on our experimental measurements of gonad dimensions. We additionally 
prescribe that germ cells must be no more than 5 
µm (~1 cell diameter) behind the 
DTC for it to progress. This constraint prevents a biologically unrealistic gap opening 
up between the DTC and following cells.  
As the DTC moves, a collection of equally spaced points on its path is stored, which 
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information

Development • Supplementary information
defines the organ midline ( see panel A below). A small point separation of 2 µm 
ensures an accurate representation of the curved geometry. At each time step, if a cell 
is further from the midline than ( gonad radius – cell radius), it lies outside the 
boundary and is moved toward the midline until it lies just inside again. Cells near the 
ends of the gonad are subject to a different position correction that generates 
hemispherical endcaps (see panel A).  
Certain details specific to the C. elegans gonad are also taken into account in the 
boundary condition. First, all germ cells in the distal region and turn are forced to lie 
just inside the boundary, forming a monolayer. An empty space representing the 
rachis is thereby created in the center of the organ. Second, our experimental 
measurements showed that the proximal gonad lengthens during L4, an effect that 
cannot be captured by moving the DTC. To reflect this, points on the midline of the 
turn are steadily shifted centrifugally during late L4, with new points added to 
maintain equal spacing (see panel B below). 
3) Statechart Updates
The state of one of the 16 starting cells in our model is described by the chart below. 
Boundary condition enforcement algorithm.  (A) Indicates how germ cells are confined 
to the gonad, by correcting their positions relative to the DTC path. Cells in the endcaps 
are repositioned by being moved toward the end of the midline as required, generating a 
hemispherical cap. A dotted line in (A) indicates the shape of the resulting boundary  
condition. (B) Shows how the “stretching” of the gonad duri ng late L4 is captured,  by 
moving midline points in the turn, and inserting n ew points to maintain equal spacing.  
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information

Development • Supplementary information
Only the initially active cell cycle phase may differ between starting cells; some may 
begin in G1, G2 or M rather than S phase. 
Initial cell state. Red = active. 
A transition out of this active set of states occurs whenever one of the transition 
conditions in square brackets is met. So for instance, since all cells are initially within 
35 µm of the DTC, the condition is met for GLP-1 to become bound immediately. 
GLP-1 binds, and as a result LAG-1 activates and GLD-1/2 inactivate:  
Cell state after one set of updates. GLP-1 binds, LAG-1 activates and GLD -1/2 inactivate. 
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information

Development • Supplementary information
When a cell moves further than 70 µm from the DTC, it meets the condition for GLP-
1 to become Absent. As a result, LAG-1 becomes inactive and GLD-1/2 become 
active. There is no immediate effect on proliferative capacity unless the cell is also in 
the G1 state, as the transition arrow into NonProliferative comes from G1 only:  
Subsequent changes in cell state follow similarly, occurring whenever a transition 
condition is met. Not all conditions are distance based; the sperm/oocyte fate decision 
depends on time post-hatching, the decision to exit proliferation depends on the cell 
cycle phase state of Mitosis as well as the states of GLD-1 and GLD-2, and the 
decision to advance to the next cell cycle phase depends on whether sufficient time 
has elapsed according to an internal counter. In addition, there are certain “actions” 
that are carried out while in a particular state (shown in blue). For instance, cells 
currently in Prophase of Meiosis I are instructed to grow, provided their current 
radius is < 4 µm.  
Finally, cell movement and death are not part of the statechart model; they are 
handled separately in the mechanics simulation. Cell death is described in the main 
materials and methods. 
4) Mechanical Feedback
As indicated in the statechart, proliferative cells count the amount of time they have 
spent in their current cell cycle phase, and move on to the next phase after a certain 
time delay has elapsed. This delay is determined on entry into the phase: for S and M 
phases the delay is fixed, for G1 and G2 it incorporates some randomness to avoid 
synchronisation (as described in the main materials and methods). In our model, this 
State in a cell >70µm from the DTC. GLP-1 becomes absent, LAG -1 inactivates and GLD -1/2 
activate.  
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information

Development • Supplementary information
counter temporarily pauses in G2 phase cells that are under “heavy compression”, 
leading to a transient G2 arrest. 
A cell is defined to be under “heavy compression” if its current compressed volume is 
less than 70% of its rest volume. The rest volume of a cell is simply the volume of a 
sphere with radius r equal to the cell radius: 
𝑉!"#$ =
!
! 𝜋𝑟!.
The compressed volume of a cell, meanwhile, is calculated by working out an 
Effective Radius (𝑅!""#$%&'#) which takes into account the effect of neighbouring cells
that overlap with the cell of interest (as in Dunn et al., 2013). Briefly, let: 
𝑅!"#   =       𝑟 − 0.5(𝑟 + 𝑟!"#$%&'( − 𝑑)!"#$%&'() . 
Where d is the cell separation. If the number of overlapping cells is less than 12 (the 
number of neighbours expected in a maximally efficient sphere packing), then a 
correction term is applied to take into account the fact that the cell has extra space 
available in certain directions: 
𝑅!""#$%&'# =
!!"#  !!∗!
!" , 
where 
𝑁∗ = 12 − 𝑁!"#$%&'().
Otherwise no such correction is needed: 
𝑅!""#$%&'# =  
!!"#
!!"#$%&'()
. 
The	  final	  compressed	  cell	  volume	  is	  the	  volume	  of	  a	  sphere	  with	  radius	  equal	  to	  
the	  Effective	  Radius:	  
𝑉∗ =  
!
! 𝜋  𝑅!""#$%&'#
!.
References 
Dunn, S. J., Näthke, I. S., Osborne, J. M.  (2013). Computational models reveal a passive mechanism 
for cell migration in the crypt. PLOS One. 8, e80516. 
Mirams, G. R., Arthurs, C. J., Bernabeu, M. O., Bordas , R., Cooper, J., Corrias, A., Davit, Y., 
Dunn, S. J., Fletcher, A. G., Harvey, D. G. et al. (2013). Chaste: An open source C++ library for 
computational physiology and biology. PLOS Comput Biol . 9, e1002970. 
Development 142: doi:10.1242/dev.126359: Supplementary information