IOP PUBLISHING PHYSICAL BIOLOGY
Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 (14pp) doi:10.1088/1478-3975/7/4/046007
Collective cell motion in endothelial
monolayers
AS z a b´o1,R ¨Unnep1,EM ´ehes1, W O Twal2,WSA r g r a v e s2, Y Cao3
and A Czir´ok1,4, 5
1 Department of Biological Physics, Eotvos University, Budapest, Hungary
2 Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC, USA
3 Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
4 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA
E-mail: andras@biol-phys.elte.hu
Received 10 September 2010
Accepted for publication 15 October 2010
Published 12 November 2010
Online at stacks.iop.org/PhysBio/7/046007
Abstract
Collective cell motility is an important aspect of several developmental and pathophysiological
processes. Despite its importance, the mechanisms that allow cells to be both motile and
adhere to one another are poorly understood. In this study we establish statistical properties of
the random streaming behavior of endothelial monolayer cultures. To understand the reported
empirical ﬁndings, we expand the widely used cellular Potts model to include active cell
motility. For spontaneous directed motility we assume a positive feedback between cell
displacements and cell polarity. The resulting model is studied with computer simulations and
is shown to exhibit behavior compatible with experimental ﬁndings. In particular, in
monolayer cultures both the speed and persistence of cell motion decreases, transient cell
chains move together as groups and velocity correlations extend over several cell diameters.
As active cell motility is ubiquitous both in vitroand in vivo, our model is expected to be a
generally applicable representation of cellular behavior.
S Online supplementary data available from stacks.iop.org/PhysBio/7/046007/mmedia
1. Introduction
Cell motility is instrumental both in development and certain
pathophysiologies [ 1, 2]. Collective motility of interacting
cells is a poorly understood but fundamental aspect of these
phenomena [3]. Such movements are required for important
morphogenetic and pathological processes, for example,
gastrulation, vasculogenesis, tumor growth, wound healing
and revascularization of damaged tissues.
Arguably, cell sorting is the best studied process involving
simultaneous displacement of closely packed cells [ 4, 5].
The differential adhesion hypothesis and its computational
representations—based on the Potts model [ 6] or analogous
lattice-free variants [7, 8]—successfully explain the outcome
as well as the time course of cell sorting experiments. The
cell types used in sorting experiments move diffusively within
5 Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
bulk uniform environments far from cell type boundaries [ 4],
although some temporal and spatial correlations are detectable
[5].
Less is known how polarized cells, which maintain their
migratory direction in time, move in high-density cultures.
Most studies addressing this problem have investigated the
expansion of epithelial cell sheets or other monolayers into
an empty area or ‘wound’. During the expansion, cells at the
monolayer boundary [ 9] or within a broader layer [ 10] exert
substantial traction forces and are thought to pull the passive
bulk of the sheet forward [4, 11].
Recent studies on the motion of kidney epithelial (MDCK
[12]) or endothelial (HUVEC [ 13]) cells within monolayers,
as well as immune cells in explanted lymph nodes [ 14],
have indicated an intriguing motion pattern. These cells
exhibit an apparently undirected, albeit correlated, streaming
behavior even in the absence of directed expansion of the
1478-3975/10/046007+14$30.00 1 © 2010 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK

Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 A Szab´o et al
holds asymptotically. Therefore, in ﬁgure 5(c) the asymptotic
linear relation between the average cell displacement and
neighbor separation with a slope of
√
2 indicates a substantial
mixing and an uncorrelated long-term behavior within the
monolayer.
Our statistical characterization thus revealed that
endothelial monolayers move in locally anisotropic, 50–
100 μm wide and 200–300 μm long streams, which form
and disappear at random positions. In low density cell cultures
cells in front of a moving cell tend to move in similar direction,
but cell movements in lateral directions are uncorrelated.
Despite the presence of streams, cell mixing is substantial
in the monolayers: with a good approximation, movement
of adjacent cells can be considered as independent persistent
random walks.
3. Model deﬁnition
3.1. Cellular Potts model
To explain and model the emergence of collective ﬂow patterns
in cell monolayers, we adopted the two-dimensional cellular
Potts model (CPM) approach. In theoretical studies the CPM is
a frequently used method to represent the movement of closely
packed cells [6, 14, 17–20]. The main advantage of the CPM
approach is that cell shape is explicitly represented; thus, the
simulation has the potential to describe dynamics in which
controlled cell shape plays an important role [ 17, 21]. To
obtain a biologically plausible, yet simple, model we consider
below a positive feedback loop between cell polarity and cell
movement in addition to the surface tension-like intercellular
adhesion and cell compressibility. As we explain in detail
below, the model assumptions are as follows.
(A1) Cells form a monolayer and each cell is simply connected.
(A2) Each cell has an approximately constant, pre-set size.
(A3) Cells adhere to their neighbors.
(A4) Each cell is capable of autonomous biased random motion.
The direction bias (in a homogeneous environment) is set
by an internal polarity vector.
(A5) The polarity vector has a ﬁnite lifetime, but it is reinforced
by co-directional displacements of the cell.
In the CPM a non-negative integer value σ is assigned
to each lattice site
x of a two-dimensional grid. Two lattice
sites are considered neighbors if they share a side (primary
neighbors) or connect via a corner (secondary neighbors).
Cells are represented as simply connected domains, i.e. a set
of adjacent lattice sites sharing the same label σ. The label is
equal to the cell index i (0 <i ⩽ N, where N is the number
of cells in the simulation). Sites that belong to the irregularly
shaped area devoid of cells are marked by the special value
σ = 0.
Cell movement is the result of a series of elementary
steps. Each step is an attempt to copy the spin value onto
a random lattice site
b from a randomly chosen adjacent site
a, where σ(a) ̸= σ(b). This elementary step is executed
with a probability p(a → b). If the domains remain simply
connected (A1), and thus cells do not break apart or form voids,
the probability assignment rule ensures the maintenance of a
target cell size (A2), adhesion of cells (A3) and active cell
motion (A4, A5). For convenience and historical reasons p is
given as
ln p(a → b) = min[0,−/Delta1u(a → b) + w(a → b)], (6)
where, as speciﬁed below in detail, w represents a bias
responsible for the cell-speciﬁc active behavior considered,
u represents a goal function to be minimized and /Delta1u(
a → b)
represents its change during the elementary step considered.
Since updating each lattice position takes more steps in
a larger system, the elementary step cannot be chosen as the
measure of time. The usual choice for the time unit is the
Monte Carlo step (MCS), deﬁned as L
2 elementary steps,
where L is the linear system size [21].
3.2. Evaluating conﬁgurations
In the CPM approach, a goal function (‘energy’) is assigned
[6] to each conﬁguration. The goal function guides the cell
behavior by distinguishing between favorable (low u) and
unfavorable (high u) conﬁgurations as
u =
∑
⟨x,x′⟩
Jσ(x),σ(x′) + λ
N∑
i=1
δA2
i . (7)
The ﬁrst term in ( 7) enumerates cell boundary lengths.
The summation goes over adjacent lattice sites. For a
homogeneous cell population, the J
i,j interaction matrix
(0 ⩽ i, j ⩽ N) is given as
Ji,j =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0f o ri = j
α for ij > 0 and i ̸= j (intercellular boundary)
β for ij = 0 and i ̸= j (free cell boundary).
(8)
The surface energy-like parameters α and β characterize
both intercellular adhesiveness and cell surface ﬂuctuations
in the model. The magnitude of these values determines
the roughness of cell boundaries: small magnitudes allow
dynamic, long and hence curvy boundaries, while large
magnitudes restrict boundaries to straight lines and thus freeze
the dynamics. In addition to cell boundary roughness, the
parameters α and β also specify the preference of intercellular
connections over free cell surfaces (A3). If two adhering cells
are separated by inserting a layer of empty sites between them,
then the change inu is proportional to 2β−α at each site along
the boundary line affected. Therefore, for 2 β>α free cell
boundaries are penalized and the cells are adhesive [22].
The second term in expression ( 7) is responsible for
maintaining a preferred cell area (A2). For each cell i,t h e
deviation of its area from a pre-set value is denoted by δA
i.
Parameter λ adjusts the tolerance for deviation. Thus, λ is
related to the compressibility of cells in the 2D plane and also
determines the magnitude of cell area ﬂuctuations.
3.3. Cell polarity and active motility
While u evaluates conﬁgurations, w is assigned directly to
the elementary steps and therefore allows the speciﬁcation
of a broader spectrum of cellular behavior [ 23]. Active cell
motility involves cell polarity, a morphological, dynamical and
biochemical difference between the cell’s leading edge and tail
5

Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 A Szab´o et al
Table 2. Parameters used in the model.
Parameter name Symbol Value Range Main, experimentally detectable effect(s)
Cell–cell boundary cost α 2 1–4 Cell boundary ﬂexibility, cell shape
Free cell boundary cost (relevant β 1 – Cell boundary ﬂexibility, cell shape,
only in single-cell simulations) surface tension of aggregates.
Target cell area A 50 – Cell–cell distance
Area constraint coefﬁcient λ 1 0.5–2 Cell size ﬂuctuations
Self-propulsion coefﬁcient P 2 0.5–4 Average cell speed
Decay rate of cell polarity r 0.2 0.8–0.02 Persistence time of cell motion
[24, 25]. In this study we model active cell motility by ﬁrst
assigning a cell polarity vectorpk to each cell k (A4). We then
increase the probability of those elementary conversion steps
that advance the cell center in the direction parallel to
pk,a s
w(a → b) = P
∑
k=σ(a),σ(b)
/Delta1Xk(a → b)pk
|pk| . (9)
Parameter P sets the magnitude of the bias and/Delta1Xk represents
the displacement of the center of cell k during the elementary
step considered.
The cell polarity vector is an attempt to represent
the localization and magnitude of the biochemical changes
characterizing the leading edge of a migratory cell. It is
not yet clear what is the molecular polarization mechanism
in endothelial cells. The best documented front /rear
polarization mechanisms involve either the mutual inhibition
of Rac and Rho, key GTPase ‘switches’ of cell motility
[1, 26] and/or the accumulation of the phosphatidylinositol
membrane component PIP
3 [27, 28]. The accumulation
of active Rac1 (and PIP 3) at the leading edge is thought
to activate a biochemical cascade that involves the Arp2/3
complex providing new actin nucleation sites. The Rac1-
Arp2/3 cascade eventually results in a local increase in
actin polymerization, pushing the plasma membrane forward
[1, 27]. Through positive feedback loops, both the
Rac/Rho and PIP
2/PIP3 systems are thought to be able to
amplify slight spatial differences in upstream inputs and even
develop a spontaneous polarity [ 27, 28]. This ampliﬁcation
of presumably random receptor activity and the related
spontaneous symmetry breaking could explain the onset of
spontaneous cell motility in a homogeneous environment and
motivates the use of a unit vector in rule (9).
Even less molecular details are known about what drives
changes in cell polarity in the absence of external cues such
as chemoattractant gradients. However, in a motile cell the
polarization direction must change eventually. For instance,
when the advance of the leading process is impaired and
the process collapses, a new migration direction is selected
and cell polarity is altered. We propose to update the cell
polarity vectors by considering a spontaneous decay and a
reinforcement from cell displacements (A5). In each MCS the
change in
pk is
/Delta1pk =− rpk + /Delta1Xk, (10)
where r is the rate of spontaneous decay and /Delta1Xk is the
displacement of the center of cellk during the MCS considered.
A characteristic memory length T of the polarization vector is
deﬁned as T = 1/r.
Rules (9) and (10) together constitute a positive feedback
loop. In this model, steric constraints may result in co-
migration of adjacent cells as the retraction of one cell allows
for the expansion of the other. The resulting expansion of cell
bodies (like the actin polymerization process in real cells) can
therefore alter and synchronize cell polarity. The molecular
mechanism for cell polarity reinforcement by cell motility
may involve either the stabilization of PIP
3 accumulation by
actin polymerization [ 29–31] or the activation of Rac1 by
microtubule dynamics [32, 33].
4. Simulation results
We have chosen the open source tissue simulation toolkit
[21, 34] as our CPM framework, in which we implemented
our extensions as C++ codes. We refrain from using a
temperature-like parameter, as rule (3) of [ 6], analogous to
our rule (6), simply scales each CPM parameter α, β and λ by
the temperature, a constant. Thus, when comparing our studies
with those that include a temperature in the simulations, our
parameter values are to be compared with the corresponding
values divided by the temperature.
Model simulations with N = 1000 cells were performed
in a 200 × 200 lattice, with parameters α = 2, λ = 1 and
P = 2, T = 5 MCS (see table2 for a summary of the parameter
values used). After scaling by temperature, our parameters
are within the same range as those in previous studies [ 6, 20,
21, 35]. We applied closed boundary conditions (immutable
empty sites at the border) in the simulations.
The spatial scale of the model is easily determined by
comparing the empirical and simulated cell sizes. The target
cell area was set to 50 lattice sites, yielding a distance of about
7 sites between cell centers in the monolayer. This compares
to the experimentally observed 35 μm, calibrating a distance
of one lattice site to 5μm. The duration of a MCS is calibrated
by comparing empirical and simulated cell speeds (see below)
resulting in one MCS to correspond to 1 min, a value similar
to the ones used in other CPM studies [20, 21].
4.1. Individual cells perform a persistent random walk
Model simulations of single cells were performed with Potts
parameters β = 1 and λ = 1 (the parameter α is irrelevant
under these conditions). Figure 6(a) reveals that in the absence
of active motility (P = 0) the average displacementd(t) grows
with time t as
d(t,P = 0) ∼
√
t. (11)
6

Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 A Szab´o et al
(a)( b)
(c)( d)
Figure 6. Motion statistics of individual, non-interacting cells in model simulations. (a) Average displacement d(t) versus time t.V a l u e so f
P are shown in the key, β = 1, λ = 1, T = 5 min. Gray solid lines are ﬁts by the persistent random walk formula ( 2) and a square-root
function in the case of P = 0. (b) The speed S of directed motion is set by the parameterP.( c) Average displacement versus time curves and
the corresponding ﬁts, obtained from simulations with various polarization memory lengths. Values ofT are shown in the key,β = 1, λ = 1,
P = 2. (d) The persistence time of the random walk behavior, Tp, mostly depends on T through a nonlinear relation, and to a lesser extent
also on the active motion parameter P.
Thus, as in the original CPM [4, 5], cell movement is diffusive
for P = 0. Large values of P result in unrealistic cell shapes
and behavior as the effects of the other constraining terms
in expression (7) diminish. The active motility rules ( 9) and
(10) with 0 <P< 4 result in individual cells performing a
persistent random walk: as ﬁgures 6(a) and (c) demonstrate,
the average displacements are well ﬁtted by equation ( 2)f o r
d(t,P) > 1.
As ﬁgure 6(b) reveals, the speed of active motion S is
proportional to P in the 0 <P< 4 range (the parameter
P is bounded by the connectivity constrains of the model).
Because of the positive feedback between directed cell motion
and maintenance of cell polarity in our model, the persistence
time T
p increases strongly both with P and the duration of the
memory T (ﬁgure 6(d)).
4.2. Streaming behavior in monolayer simulations
Monolayer simulations result in behavior similar to the ex-
perimentally observed streaming motion, with shear lines
and vortices present (ﬁgure 7(a) and movie 2 (available at
stacks.iop.org/PhysBio/7/046007)). Motion within the mono-
layer is somewhat hindered when compared with individual
cells, as the speed and persistence time decrease by 20%
(ﬁgure 7(b)). In addition to qualitative similarity, the calcula-
tion of ﬂow ﬁelds allows for a more rigorous comparison of
model simulations to empirical data (ﬁgure 8, to be compared
with ﬁgures 3 and 4). Lateral correlations and back-ﬂow are
reduced when non-adherent cells are simulated at lower cell
densities (ﬁgure 8(b)). At subconﬂuent densities the average
ﬂow ﬁeld still reveals the ‘steric’ repulsion of cells in the path
of an actively moving cell.
4.3. Parameters
We introduced two new parameters, P and T, in addition to
the usual CPM parameters describing free and intercellular
boundaries (α and β) and compressibility λ. In monolayer
simulations there are no free cell boundaries; therefore, the
parameter β is irrelevant. Parameter sensitivity analysis
revealed that the model can also exhibit an ordered
phase. In this phase, responding to the closed boundary
conditions, all cells participate in a single, system-wide
rotational movement. This state is reached by increasing
the memory duration T. For increasing T (but still below
the threshold needed for the formation of a single vortex),
the streams become wider (ﬁgure 9(a) and movie 3
(available at stacks.iop.org/PhysBio/7/046007)). Conversely,
by decreasing either T or P, a diffusive state is recovered,
where the persistence length is smaller than the size of a cell
(movie 4 available at stacks.iop.org/PhysBio/7/046007). In
this limit
V (x) is well approximated by the ﬂow ﬁeld of an
incompressible ﬂuid around a moving disk: Vx decays as x−2
and −y−2 along the x and y axes, respectively. Increasing P or
T results in wider and longer streams (ﬁgure 9(e)–(h)).
The d2 separation of adjacent cell pairs, when plotted
against the mean cell displacement d (ﬁgure 9(b) and ( d)),
reveals the system-wide ordered ﬂow, when cells can cover
7

Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 A Szab´o et al
300   mμ
(a) (b)
*
*
Figure 7. Motion characteristics in monolayer simulations. A representative parameter setting was chosen as P = 2, T = 5 min, α = 2,
β = 1a n dλ = 1. (a) Model cell trajectories, from a 40 min long time interval, reveal streams formed by several cells (blue arrows). The
inset shows trajectories from a 90 min long interval, color-coded progressively from older to newer as red to green to blue. A shear line
separating streams moving in opposite directions (black line) and two vortices (asterisks) are indicated. (b) Average displacements of single,
unconstrained cells are greater than those in a monolayer. Persistence time and cell speed in a monolayer fall from 40 to 30 min and from
55 μmh
−1 to 40 μmh −1, respectively.
μ
μ100   m
100   m
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)    = 0.25ρ
monolayer
Figure 8. Flow ﬁelds V (x) around a moving cell within a monolayer (a) and a subconﬂuent culture (b) simulation. The corresponding
parallel and perpendicular velocity proﬁles are shown in panels (c)a n d(d), respectively. Cell density values speciﬁed in the keys are
normalized to conﬂuent culture density (ρ = 1). In low density cultures correlations are reduced in the lateral direction. Velocity vectors
represent 1 h displacements; the green arrow indicates the average velocity of the cells. As in ﬁgure 3, the color code in panels (a)a n d(b)
indicates the estimated relative SEM, and the color scale represents the interval [0 : 1].
large displacements without changing their neighbors ( d ≫
d2/
√
2). In the streaming regime the asymptotic relation ( 5)
holds indicating uncorrelated motion within the monolayer.
Depending on the values of P and T, increasing α can
result in a multitude of changes. Reﬂecting its deﬁnition, a
simulation with higher α values yields cells with smoother
boundaries (ﬁgures 10(b) and ( d)). In general, reducing the
freedom of cell boundary movement hinders cell intercalation,
and thus movement within a monolayer. This is indicated
by decreasing speeds with increasing α (data not shown).
However, if self-propulsion is strong enough, the reduced
intercalation can also yield wider streams as demonstrated
by ﬁgures 10(c), (e) and (f ).
Our model for actively moving cells in a monolayer
culture is thus capable of explaining most experimental
observations presented in section 2. Furthermore, the simple
model structure allows a thorough mapping of the parameter
space. We ﬁnd it remarkable that a given pair of (P, T )
parameters yield individual cell speeds, persistence times in
the correct range as well as a collective behavior comparable
with the observed streaming. In particular, T = 5 min is
a plausible value for the time needed to alter cell polarity.
8

Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 A Szab´o et al
100  mμ
100  mμ
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
T=50 min
T=1.25 min
(h)(g)
(e)( f )
Figure 9. The self propulsion parameters, P and T, play a crucial role in deﬁning the collective behavior of the monolayer. Flow ﬁelds V (x)
are shown for long ((a) T = 50 min) and short ((c) T = 1.25 min) memory duration of cell polarity. The remaining parameters are the same
as in ﬁgure 7. Flow ﬁelds are presented as in ﬁgure 8. The corresponding parallel and perpendicular velocity proﬁles are shown in panels (e)
and (f ), respectively. Increasing T results in wider, longer and faster streams. Similar but less dramatic tendencies are seen when changing
P (panels (g)a n d(h)). For large enough T, the system organizes into a phase where the correlation length is comparable to the system size.
Movement within the monolayer is diffusive in the streaming regime as the average neighbor separation versus cell displacement curves
(panels (b)a n d(d)) are consistent with the asymptotic behavior of equation (5), shown as the solid line. In the globally ordered (rotating)
regime cells move further without separating. The asterisk marks the parameter values used in ﬁgure 7.
With this value, it is possible to obtain cell speeds in the
range of 20–40 μmh −1 within monolayers and 50 μmh −1 for
individual cells. Our empirical data show cell speeds between
10 and 30 μmh −1 for monolayers. A similarly close and
independent agreement is obtained for the persistence times,
at approximately 1 h both in the model and in the experiments.
The spatial structure of streams is strongly anisotropic, being
approximately 200–300 μm long and 100 μmw i d ei nb o t h
the experiments and in the simulations.
5. Discussion
While correlated cell velocities and streams in MDCK and
HUVEC monolayers were recently reported [ 12, 13], their
9

Phys. Biol. 7 (2010) 046007 A Szab´o et al
(a)
(c)
100   mμ
μ100   m
(b)
(d)
( f )(e)
α=1
α=4
*
* *
*
Figure 10. Role of cell adhesion parameter α. Simulation results are compared for α = 1 (panels (a), (b)) and α = 4 (panels (c), (d)).
Self-propulsion is strong (P = 3), while the remaining parameters are the same as in ﬁgure 7. As the conﬁgurations demonstrate (panels
(b), (d)), parameter α controls the cell shape and cell boundary smoothness. The V (x) ﬂow ﬁelds (panels (a), (c)) and their proﬁles along
the parallel (e) and perpendicular (f ) axes reveal that the streams get wider with increasing α as cells cannot easily intercalate. Flow ﬁelds
are presented as in ﬁgure 8. The insets in panels (b)a n d(d) demonstrate cell trajectories, comparable with similar plots in ﬁgures 1 and 7.
The asterisk marks the parameter values used in ﬁgure 7.
dynamics remained largely unexplained. To obtain further
empirical data to test our model, we systematically investigated
monolayer cultures of three different endothelial cell lines.
Our ﬁnding that 5–20 cells move together in narrow, chain-like
groups is in accord with previous reports. Because our cultures
were grown in a monolayer, our measured cell speeds and
persistence times (S ≈ 10 − 30 μmh
−1, T ≈ 1 h) somewhat
differ from the values previously reported for individual
endothelial cells ( S ≈ 40 μmh −1, T ≈ 3h[ 36]; S ≈
50 μmh −1, T ≈ 0.6h[ 37]).
5.1. Models for collective cell movements
Previous theoretical studies on cell movement include a multi-
particle model that was proposed to explain the collective
10