Article
Mechanical control of cell proliferation patterns in
growing epithelial monolayers
Logan C. Carpenter,1 Fernanda P/C19erez-Verdugo,1 and Shiladitya Banerjee1,*
1Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
ABSTRACT Cell proliferation plays a crucial role in regulating tissue homeostasis and development. However, our under-
standing of how cell proliferation is controlled in densely packed tissues is limited. Here we develop a computational framework
to predict the patterns of cell proliferation in growing epithelial tissues, connecting single-cell behaviors and cell-cell interactions
to tissue-level growth. Our model incorporates probabilistic rules governing cell growth, division, and elimination, also taking into
account their feedback with tissue mechanics. In particular, cell growth is suppressed and apoptosis is enhanced in regions of
high cell density. With these rules and model parameters calibrated using experimental data for epithelial monolayers, we predict
how tissue conﬁnement inﬂuences cell size and proliferation dynamics and how single-cell physical properties inﬂuence the
spatiotemporal patterns of tissue growth. In this model, mechanical feedback between tissue conﬁnement and cell growth leads
to enhanced cell proliferation at tissue boundaries, whereas cell growth in the bulk is arrested, recapitulating experimental ob-
servations in epithelial tissues. By tuning cellular elasticity and contact inhibition of proliferation we can regulate the emergent
patterns of cell proliferation, ranging from uniform growth at low contact inhibition to localized growth at higher contact inhibition.
We show that the cell size threshold at G1/S transition governs the homeostatic cell density and tissue turnover rate, whereas
the mechanical state of the tissue governs the dynamics of tissue growth. In particular, we ﬁnd that the cellular parameters
affecting tissue pressure play a signiﬁcant role in determining the overall growth rate. Our computational study thus underscores
the impact of cell mechanical properties on the spatiotemporal patterns of cell proliferation in growing epithelial tissues.
INTRODUCTION
The regulation of cell proliferation is critical for tissue
development, maintenance of homeostasis, and disease sup-
pression ( 1,2). Uncontrolled proliferation results in hyper-
plasia, a hallmark of cancerous mutations ( 3). Cell
proliferation involves the coordinated processes of cell
growth and division at the individual cell level. However,
the precise coordination of cell growth and division within
the multicellular context is still poorly understood. One
mechanism implicated in the control of cell growth is con-
tact inhibition of proliferation, where cellular growth is in-
hibited in denser environments ( 4). In epithelial tissues,
contact inhibition has been shown to be regulated by several
factors, including intercellular signaling ( 5–7), cellular
crowding ( 8,9) mechanical stress ( 10–12), and pressure
(13). In particular, cells under compression grow slower
than cells under stretch ( 10,14). However, cellular response
to mechanical stress and intercellular signaling is inﬂuenced
by various factors, such as cell-cell adhesion, cellular resis-
tance to deformations, cytoskeletal tension, local cell den-
sity, and cell-cycle phase. Manipulating these factors
individually within tissues is challenging, leaving the
Submitted July 26, 2023, and accepted for publication March 1, 2024.
*Correspondence: shiladtb@andrew.cmu.edu
Editor: Jennifer Schwarz.
SIGNIFICANCE Control of cell proliferation in multicellular environments is crucial for tissue development and
homeostasis. To understand the regulation of cell proliferation, we developed a multi-layered computational model that
integrates physical interactions between cells with active cell behaviors governing cell fate decisions. Using this model, we
investigated the impact of cellular crowding on cell size control, growth rate, and division dynamics. The multi-scale model
enabled us to elucidate the role of single-cell properties in determining epithelial tissue homeostasis, growth kinetics, and
spatial patterns of proliferation. Notably, we found that cellular elasticity and contact inhibition of proliferation governed the
emergent dynamics of cell proliferation, emphasizing the impact of cellular mechanics on cell proliferation dynamics in
epithelial tissues.
Biophysical Journal 123, 909–919, April 2, 2024 909
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2024.03.002
/C2112024 Biophysical Society.

relative contributions of mechanical and biochemical pro-
cesses in regulating cell growth largely unexplored.
Cell proliferation relies crucially on the mechanism of
cell division. Although cell growth and division are coupled
in single cells ( 15,16), cell division can occur independently
of growth in tissues ( 17). Various models of cell division
control have been proposed in recent years for bacteria
and eukaryotes, as reviewed in Refs. ( 15,18). These include
the adder model ( 19–21), where cells grow by a ﬁxed vol-
ume between successive divisions; the sizer model
(22,23), where cell division occurs above a critical cell
size threshold ( 8,24); as well as mixed models of cell size
control ( 25,26). Recent studies on mammalian epithelial
cells, however, suggested that the regulation of the cell cycle
in both single cells and tissues can be well described by a G1
sizer model ( 26,27). In this model, there is a cell-size-
dependent transition from the growth (G1) phase to the
mitosis (S/G2/M) phase. Cells spend a ﬁxed amount of
time in S/G2/M phase before division occurs. Consequently,
the rate of cell division is regulated by the time required to
reach the critical size threshold at the G1/S transition,
which, in turn, depends on cellular growth rate. Considering
the diverse range of biophysical factors inﬂuencing cell size
and growth rate, it remains to be determined how cell prolif-
eration patterns in tissues are precisely controlled by these
factors.
Many cell-based models of epithelial tissue growth have
been developed in recent years, which explored the effects
of contact inhibition ( 28–30), cellular crowding ( 9,31), me-
chanical stress ( 8,10,11), and intercellular adhesion ( 32)o n
tissue-scale growth dynamics. In particular, it has been
observed that contact inhibition of proliferation leads to
enhanced cell proliferation at tissue boundaries while inhib-
iting growth within the bulk of the tissue ( 8,10). Notably, ex-
periments have revealed diverse patterns of tissue growth,
including bulk epithelial growth in vitro ( 27,33) and in vivo
(34), as well as spatially patterned growth in vitro ( 33,35).
How the emergent patterns of cell proliferation are regulated
by cell-cell mechanical interactions remains unclear.
In this work, we developed a cell-based model for epithe-
lial monolayer growth that aims to uncover how single-cell
behaviors and mechanical properties govern tissue-scale
proliferation patterns. Our integrative model couples the
physical dynamics of cells with active cellular behaviors
that determine their fates ( Fig. 1 ). The physical layer of
the model is implemented using the cellular Potts model
(36), whereas the active behaviors are implemented as rules
for cell-cycle regulation, contact inhibition of proliferation,
and cell elimination via apoptosis and extrusion. In
contrast to previous cellular models for tissue growth
(8,10,30,31,37,38), we incorporate a G1 sizer model for
cell-cycle progression (
27) that allows for tunable growth
rates of individual cells based on the amount of crowding.
Furthermore, our model implements contact inhibition
through crowding-induced suppression of cellular growth
rate and introduces a cell-density-dependent probability of
apoptosis. Taken together, our model incorporates feedback
between mechanical pressure and the rates of cell growth,
division, and apoptosis within a tissue context.
Using this model, we successfully recapitulated several
single-cell behaviors observed experimentally, including
the distribution of cell areas, the control of cell-cycle dura-
tion, and the decrease in cell size over time. The latter is
caused by a transition from a sizer-like to a timer-like con-
trol of cell size that leads to volume-reductive cell division
as local cell density is increased via tissue growth. Subse-
quently, cell-cycle arrest occurs as cell size falls below the
minimal size threshold required for G1/S transition.
Notably, we found that the cell size threshold at the G1/S
transition is the primary determinant of tissue properties
in homeostasis, including homeostatic density and steady-
state rates of cell division and elimination. In contrast, the
rate of cell proliferation is predominantly regulated by the
physical properties of cells, speciﬁcally cell elasticity,
growth rate, and sensitivity to contact inhibition. Interest-
ingly, spatial patterns of cell growth and cell cycle exhibit
variations depending on the values of cell elastic modulus
and sensitivity to contact inhibition. Tissues with moderate
to high sensitivities to contact inhibition display boundary
growth, whereas tissues with a higher cell elastic modulus
exhibit bulk growth. For intermediate values of elastic
modulus and contact inhibition, diverse patterns of cell pro-
liferation emerge, emphasizing the inﬂuential role of
Decision-Making Layer
Rules Physical dynamics
Physical Layer (CPM)
(D1)(R1) Cell cycle progression
(R2) Cell division
(R3) Apoptosis
(R4) Live cell extrusion
(R1) (R2) (R3) (R4)
apoptosis
1
divisionn
1
0
extrude
/4
)e
1
(D2) Cell growth
Cell-cell adhesion
(D3) Shape maintenance
(A) (B)
feedback
FIGURE 1 Overview of the computational modeling framework. ( A)
Cell-autonomous decisions and their rules. ( R1) Cycle progression from
G1 (sizer phase) to S/G2/M (timer phase) phase is triggered by the cell
area exceeding a threshold value AS.( R2) Mitosis is triggered after a
time t0 has elapsed since the beginning of the S/G2/M phase. ( R3)
Apoptosis is triggered probabilistically as a function of local cell density.
(R4) Cellular extrusion is triggered when the cell area reaches one fourth
of the mean area for all cells in the tissue. ( B) The physical layer evolves
via probabilistic minimization of cell mechanical energy using the cellular
Potts model, which accounts for ( D1) contact energy at cell-cell and cell-
medium interfaces, ( D2) growth in cell size by increasing cell target area
and subsequent relaxation of area elastic energy, and ( D3) cell shape main-
tenance by relaxing mechanical energy of the cell. To see this ﬁgure in co-
lor, go online.
Carpenter et al.
910 Biophysical Journal 123, 909–919, April 2, 2024

mechanical factors in governing tissue-scale proliferation
dynamics. These ﬁndings provide new insights into the intri-
cate interplay between mechanical and cellular factors in
tissue growth regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Computational model
To predict the emergent patterns of cell proliferation, we developed a two-
dimensional cell-based model for epithelial monolayer tissue growth that
integrates two distinct computational layers: 1) a physical layer that simu-
lates mechanical interactions between cells and between cells and the
external medium; and 2) a decision-making layer that encodes cell-autono-
mous rules for growth, division, and apoptosis ( Fig. 1 ). For simplicity, we
neglected cell motility and focused on the role of cell mechanics and
cell-cycle regulation on tissue growth.
In the physical layer, we used the lattice-based cellular Potts model
(36,39) at a ﬁnite temperature, where cells are formed by a subset of lattice
sites sharing the same identity. Each lattice site i is assigned a type s
i ¼
fc : cell; m : mediumg and an integer-valued identity ni, with ni ¼ 0 for
the external medium and ni > 0 for a cell. The mechanical energy of cells
in the cellular Potts model can be written in a simpliﬁed form as
E ¼
X
i;j
neighbors
Jij
/C0
si; sj
/C1
þ l
X
a ˛cells
b
/C0
Aa /C0 AT
a
/C1 2
;
(Equation 1)
where the ﬁrst term represents interfacial energy arising from tension at cell-
cell junctions, adhesion between cells, and between cells and the extracellular
medium. The interfacial energy is summed over adjacent lattice sites i and j,
with nisnj. The energy Jij can take two different values depending on the
adjacent lattice types: Jijðc; cÞ¼ Jcc and Jijðc; mÞ¼ Jijðm; cÞ¼ Jcm.
We assumed greater adhesion for cell-cell contact than cell-medium contact
yielding the condition J
cc %Jcm. The second energy term is summed over all
the cells, representing an elastic energy that penalizes deviations of the cell
areas Aa from their preferred (target) values AT
a, with an area elastic modulus
l. At each computational time step, the lattice site i can take the value of its
adjacent site nj (with nisnj), inducing cell shape changes. These lattice
moves are executed via the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm ( 40,41)t oe n s u r e
that the moves minimize the mechanical energy.
The decision-making layer implements cell-autonomous rules for cell-
cycle progression, mitosis, apoptosis, extrusion, and changing the cell’s
target area. Cell growth is implemented by increasing the cell’s target
area AT
a (31), as
dAT
a
dt ¼ Ge/C0 kðAa /C0 AT
aÞ
2
; (Equation 2)
where the constant G represents the rate of growth in the absence of crowd-
ing (when Aa /C24 AT
a). We deﬁne k as a metric of cellular sensitivity to
crowding. In crowded conditions, it is difﬁcult for cells to maintain their
areas close to the growing target area, and hence DA
a ¼ Aa /C0 AT
a in-
creases in magnitude. Under these conditions, Eq. 2 leads to an exponential
decay in the rate of cell growth, resulting in longer cell-cycle times propor-
tional to k. Contact inhibition in our model is thus a consequence of phys-
ical constraint induced by tissue crowding ( 8), resulting in deviation of cell
area from its preferred value in isolation ( 27).
The number of cells in the tissue, N, changes in time due to the rules im-
plemented in the decision-making layer. N can increase through cell divi-
sions, which is regulated by a G1 sizer model ( 26,27). In this model, a
cell is in the G1 phase until its area is greater than a threshold value AS
(Fig. 1 A–R1), at which point it transitions to the S/G2/M phase, which lasts
for a ﬁxed time period t0 (a timer). After a time t0 in the S/G2/M phase, the
cell divides into two cells ( Fig. 1 A–R2), upon which the target area of each
cell is set to the current area. Both t0 and AS are drawn from a Gaussian
distribution, with mean and standard deviation deﬁned in Table 1 , based
on data reported for Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells ( 27).
On the other hand, the number of cells in the tissue can decrease via
cellular apoptosis and extrusion. The model considers a density-dependent
probability of apoptosis, Papo, which increases with the local cell density r
(9,42,43)( Fig. 1 A–R3)
PapoðrÞ¼ papo;max
1 þ e/C0 aðr /C0 r1=2Þ ; (Equation 3)
where papo;max is the maximal probability of apoptosis, r1=2 is the cell den-
sity at half-maximal probability, and a is the sensitivity to density-depen-
dent apoptosis. The parameters papo;max, r1=2 and a are determined by
ﬁtting apoptosis probabilities calculated from in vitro MDCK cell compe-
tition experiments performed by Bove et al. ( 9). In our simulations, local
cell density was deﬁned as the sum of inverse cell areas within the imme-
diate neighborhood of a given cell a (9,31),
ra ¼ 1
Aa
þ
X
i ˛neighbors of a
1
Ai
; (Equation 4)
where we deﬁned local neighborhood as the set of ﬁrst neighbors of a cell
(i.e., all the cells in physical contact with a given cell). After entering
apoptosis, the cell’s target area is set to zero, causing the cell to gradually
decrease in area until being removed. Finally, a cell is eliminated via live-
cell extrusion if its area is less than a quarter of the mean cellular area (i.e.,
A
aCAaD=4; Fig. 1 A–R4). This is handled computationally by immediately
TABLE 1 Default Parameters Used in Model Simulations
Parameter Numerical Value (units) Description
kBT 1.95 /C2 10/C0 4ðlA2
SÞ thermal energy scale of Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm
Jcc 1.17 /C2 10/C0 4ðlA3=2
S Þ cell-cell contact energy
Jcm 1.96 /C2 10/C0 4ðlA3=2
S Þ cell-medium contact energy
l 1 cell-area elastic modulus
G 1.16 ( AS0 =t0) growth rate of an isolated cell
k 1.897 /C2 105 (A/C0 2
S ) sensitivity to crowding
t0 225 5 5.625 (Monte Carlo steps) S/G2/M timer duration
AS 1377 5 34.4 (pixels) G1 sizer threshold
papo;max 0.0015 maximal probability of apoptosis
r1=2 1.5015 ( A/C0 1
S ) cell density at half-maximal probability of
apoptosis
a 0.968 ( AS) sensitivity to density-dependent apoptosis
Mechanical control of cell proliferation
Biophysical Journal 123, 909–919, April 2, 2024 911

deleting the cell, which reassigns the deleted cell’s lattice sites to medium
lattice sites. Taken together, the rate of cell proliferation in the tissue is
given by _N ¼ kbirth /C0 kelim, where kbirth corresponds to the rate of cellular
divisions and kelim corresponds to the rate of cell elimination via both
apoptosis and extrusion. Combining the physical and decision-making
layers results in a predictive cell-based model (see supporting material
for details) that can simulate the spatiotemporal dynamics of a growing
tissue in different biophysical contexts.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Collective behaviors in growing epithelial
monolayers
To validate the predictive capacity of our model, we used it
to recapitulate experimentally observed collective and sin-
gle-cell behaviors in growing epithelial monolayers
(8, 27). We simulated the growth of a planar epithelial tis-
sue, conﬁned within a square box of area /C24 1600A
S (Videos
S1 and S2). The simulations were initialized with a single
cell of area below the G1 sizer threshold AS. As a ﬁrst
step, we performed two ensembles of simulations: 1) tissue
growth without apoptosis ( Papo ¼ 0, Video S1), and 2) tis-
sue growth with apoptosis, occurring with a density-depen-
dent probability P
apo as deﬁned in Eq. 3 (Video S2 ). Here,
we considered the limit in which the scale of the elastic
force, lA
3=2
S , is larger than the tension between cells, Jcc,
and the tension between boundary cells and the external me-
dium, J
cm, with Jcm >J cc (see Table 1 for a list of default
parameter values). Consequently, the tissues grew while
maintaining their initial isotropic state, with a roughly circu-
lar boundary, until they made contact with the simulation
box ( Fig. 2 E and F; Videos S1 and S2).
Our model accurately captured the experimentally
measured trends in the dynamics of cell count and average
cell density during epithelial colony growth and homeosta-
sis (Figs. 2 A and B and S8)( 9). During the growth phase of
the tissue, constituent cells exhibited nonuniform sizes and
growth rates, with a slowly growing bulk region surrounded
by a rapidly proliferating periphery ( Fig. 2 E and F). Rapid
replication of cells near the boundary have previously been
observed in several experiments on epithelial tissues
(8,10,13,33). In our model, this results from crowding-
induced suppression of growth in the bulk of the tissue,
which results in smaller cell size in the bulk compared to
the periphery ( Fig. 2 C and D). With or without apoptosis,
the simulated tissues grew until they reached conﬂuence,
ﬁlling the entire simulation box ( Fig. 2 E and F). This
was followed by a state of homeostasis where the cell count
and the average density did not change. In this state, the
rates of cell division and elimination balanced to yield a
net zero growth rate. Conﬂuence led to uniform crowding
throughout the tissue, resulting in the homogenization of
the cellular areas and density ( Fig. 2 A and B).
In simulations without apoptosis, the rate of cell elimina-
tion k
elim arises from live-cell extrusions only. Homeostasis
in these simulations is characterized by kbirth ¼ kelim ¼ 0,
where all the cells are arrested in the G1 phase, with Aa <A S;
ca. By contrast, in simulations with apoptosis, the elimina-
tion rate is dependent on both live-cell extrusions and
apoptosis, the latter being a density-dependent probabilistic
process. Therefore, homeostasis is characterized by a dy-
namic balance between birth and elimination, with
k
birth ¼ kelims0. Cell density-dependent apoptosis events
induced cellular growth in the neighborhood of a dying
cell ( Fig. 2 F), leading to increased cell size and lower
values of cell count and average cell density ( Fig. 2 A
and B). Furthermore, cell elimination events increased the
time required to reach homeostasis ( Fig. 2 A), promoting
continuous cell turnover and growth in the tissue.
Single-cell dynamics underlying epithelial growth
and homeostasis
Spatial regulation of cell proliferation is a direct conse-
quence of how cell cycle and growth are regulated across
a tissue ( Figs. 2 E and F and S1). Here, we characterize
the single-cell growth and size dynamics underlying the
growth of an epithelial colony. A major regulator of sin-
gle-cell growth rate is local crowding by other cells. Growth
rate of cells in the bulk of the tissue reduced over time due to
an increase in local cell density, leading to a transition in the
mitotic behavior of cells. During the early phase of growth
(up to tz7t
0), cells exhibited timer-like behavior with divi-
sions occurring at regular intervals of t0 due to the cell size
being larger than the G1 sizer threshold AS (Fig. 3 A). Dur-
ing this period, cell size distribution was unimodal ( Fig. 3 C
and D), with a mean value A>A S. Mean cell area, A,
decreased in time since the amount of growth accrued in
the timer (S/G2/M) phase, Gt
0 /C24 1:16AS < A, was less
than the amount of cell size reduction via division. This phe-
nomenon of size-reductive divisions recapitulates experi-
mental observations in growing MDCK monolayers ( 8,27).
Once cell size in the population fell below A
S (Fig. 3 C
and D, t> 7t0), two sub-population of cells emerged: one
with mean size above AS that would divide after time t0
in the G2 phase, and another with mean size below AS
that would be growing in the G1 phase and therefore would
divide in a time longer than t0. This behavior is evident in
the cell area distribution, which changed from a unimodal
to a bimodal shape (see t /C24 7:6t0 in Fig. 3 C and D). How-
ever, as cell crowding increased via an increase in the local
cell density ( Fig. 3 A and B), cell area decreased over several
generations, narrowing the area distribution ( Fig. 3 C
and D). A consequence of crowding-induced slowdown of
single-cell growth is a negative correlation between cell
area and interdivision time ( Fig. 3 E and F), as observed
experimentally ( 8).
In our analysis, the onset of conﬂuence is deﬁned as the
time at which 99.5% of the simulated space is occupied by
cells within the tissue. Post conﬂuence ( t> 35t
0), cell growth
Carpenter et al.
912 Biophysical Journal 123, 909–919, April 2, 2024

was either nonexistent or slow due to the lack of available
free space. In simulations without apoptosis, cells underwent
complete cycle arrest ( Fig. 3 A), as a result of the lack of tis-
sue turnover to free up space. By contrast, in simulations with
apoptosis, the rates of growth and division were limited by
the available free space that appears after cell elimination.
Consequently, the cell cycles progressed at a very slow rate
(t R20t
0 in Fig. 3 B), primarily determined by the rate of
apoptosis within the tissue. These slowly growing cells
were stuck in the G1 phase for the majority of the cell cycle
and divided relatively fast after exceeding the G1 size
threshold A
S, thereby exhibiting sizer-like behavior.
G1 sizer sets homeostatic cell density and
turnover rate
Having validated our model predictions for collective and
single-cell behaviors against experimental observations,
we turned to assessing the roles of cell-scale parameters
on the emergent tissue-level properties during growth and
homeostasis. To this end, we varied the model parameters
regulating cell growth and division dynamics, including
the growth rate G, area elastic modulus l, cell-cell adhesion
energy J
cc, sensitivity to crowding k, and the G1 sizer
threshold AS. As a ﬁrst step, we studied the effect of these
parameters on homeostatic tissue properties, including
homeostatic cell density and turnover rate.
Prior studies have demonstrated that epithelial tissues
possess a speciﬁc density they tend to restore after perturba-
tions, indicating their tendency to maintain a preferred ho-
meostatic density ( 14,44,45). However, the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of this homeostatic density, which
plays a pivotal role in maintaining tissue homeostasis
(14,43,46) and cell competition ( 31,42), remain poorly un-
derstood. Our simulations revealed that the G1 sizer
threshold A
S is the only parameter that determines the ho-
meostatic density ( Fig. 4 A and C). This can be intuitively
understood from the fact that AS regulates cell size limit
-
-
-
-
----
0.5 
Growth Rate
0
-0.5
ffOsisotpopAnOsisotpopA
B
E t = 9τ t = 18τ
Time (τ )
t = 25τ t = 35τ
C D
F 
9τ
τ
τ
0
18 0
25 0
τ0
τ0
τ0
τ0
τ0
0 00
0Time (τ )0
0
35
9
18
25
35
A
0
1
2
0
20 40
9 0
18 0
25 0
35 0
x103
Apoptosis on
Apoptosis off
(A1/2
S )Distance from center
0                  10                  20
5/4 5/4
1
3/4
(A1/2
S )Distance from center
aerAlleC
tnuoClleC
ytisneDlacoL
ρ
0                  10                  20
1
3/4
(AS)
aerAlleC (AS)
0 20 40
2
6
10(1/AS)
Apoptosis on
Apoptosis off
G
G
FIGURE 2 Characterization of collective behaviors in growing epithelial monolayers. ( A and B) Cell count vs. time ( A) and average cell density vs. time
(B) in colony growth simulations with apoptosis on ( orange) and off ( blue). The x axis represents time measured in factors of t0, the mean timer threshold. ( C
and D) Spatial distribution of single-cell areas for monolayers at different time points during growth, without ( C) or with ( D) apoptosis. Each curve represents
a colony’s spatially averaged cell area as a function of distance from the center of the colony. The vertical dashed line is position of the boundary of t he
simulation box. In ( A)–(D), each data point is the average of ﬁve simulations with the shaded regions being the standard deviation. ( E and F) Time-lapse
showing the morphologies of a growing epithelial colony without ( E) or with ( F) apoptosis. Cells are colored according to their growth rates. See Table 1
for a list of parameter values. To see this ﬁgure in color, go online.
Mechanical control of cell proliferation
Biophysical Journal 123, 909–919, April 2, 2024 913

2
SUPPLEMENTAL METHODS
Cellular Potts Model
We used the Cellular Potts Model (CPM) [1] to simulate the dynamics of a growing tissue. Although
alternative cell-based modeling frameworks exist for tissue modeling, such as vertex models [2], cell-center
models [3], or particle-based models [4], our choice of CPM was motivated by its ease of implementation for
key aspects of this study, including straightforward integration of agent-based rules, boundary conditions,
and interactions between cells and the extracellular medium. Our simulation framework integrates two
distinct computational components: (1) a physical layer that simulates cell mechanics with the Cellular
Potts Model, and (2) a decision-making layer that deﬁnes rules for cell growth, division, and apoptosis.
The CPM is a versatile computational framework for simulating biological systems such as cell growth,
migration, and tissue formation. The CPM runs a Monte Carlo simulation with the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm [5, 6] to minimize the free energy of the system.
A common choice of the Hamiltonian [1] includes terms that represent contact energies and an area
elastic energy, as in
E = ∑
i, j
neighbors
Ji j(σi,σj) +λ ∑
α∈cells
(
Aα −AT
α
)2
, (S.1)
The contact energy, Ji, j, is given by the difference between the cellular surface tension and intercellular
adhesion energy. This energy is represented in the Hamiltonian by a component that is proportional to the
number of pixels shared between cells or between a cell and the medium. The sum goes over all adjacent
lattice sites i and j, ignoring self-adhesion. The inner term, σ, gives the cell type at the lattice site i and j
respectively. A value for contact energy is deﬁned between each cell type, which for our simulations consists
of interactions between cells and medium Jcell-cell = Jcc, Jcell-medium = Jcm, and Jmedium-medium = Jmm. The
second term in the Hamiltonian is the area elastic energy. This is given by the product of the area elastic
modulus, λ, with the sum of squared differences between the actual area of the cells, Aα , and their target
areas, AT
α . These two mechanical energy components regulate individual cell shape and size, in the absence
of other rules.
The CPM simulations were run using CompuCell3D [7], a software package that handles all of the
computations necessary for the CPM and the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. The version of CompuCell3D
we used permits cell fragmentation proportional to the lattice temperature, which we setT = 10 in the units
of lattice energy. We found that this temperature produced negligible fragmentation.

3
Rules for active cell behaviors
The decision-making layer of the model encodes probabilistic rules for active cell behaviors including
changes in cell target area, cell cycle regulation, and cell elimination.
Dynamics of cell growth– Cell growth dynamics are implemented by increasing the cell’s target area as
dAT
α
dt = Ge−k(Aα −AT
α )2
, (S.2)
where G is the growth rate in the absence of crowding, k quantiﬁes cellular sensitivity to crowding, and Aα
is the current area of cell α. In the presence of crowding, a cell’s area will deviate from its target area, and
this deviation is directly proportional to the strength of contact inhibition. Consequently, cellular growth
exhibits an exponential decline as crowding intensiﬁes, ultimately leading the tissue to enter an arrested
state.
Cell cycle regulation– We implemented a two-phase cell cycle model, comprising a G1 growth phase
operating through a sizer mechanism, followed by an S/G2/M timer phase. When a cell is born, it is
assigned a G1 area threshold AS and an S/G2/M phase timer τ. The cell remains in the G1 phase until
its area exceeds AS. Afterward, it enters the S/G2/M phase, which lasts for a duration of τ. Since the
S/G2/M phases are grouped into the singular timer phase, we decided to make the change in target area
(eq S.2) independent of the cell cycle phase. The assumption of continuous growth through the cell cycle
is informed by growth data on single epithelial cells [8]. Upon completion of the S/G2/M phase, the cell
immediately undergoes division, perpendicular to the semi-major axis, resulting in two daughter cells, both
of which enter the G1 phase.
Mechanisms for cell elimination – In the simulation, cell elimination involves two mechanisms: pro-
grammed cell death (apoptosis) and live-cell extrusion. Experimental data have shown that increasing cell
density leads to a higher apoptosis rate [9–11]. We deﬁned the local cellular density as the sum of inverse
cell areas within a local neighborhood of a cell. The density of cell α is given by:
ρα = 1
Aα
+ ∑
i∈neighbors of α
1
Ai
. (S.3)
To model the probability of apoptosis in wild-type MDCK cells as a function of local cell density [11], we
ﬁt the data to a sigmoid curve:
Papo(ρ) = papo,max
1 + e−α(ρ−ρ1/2) . (S.4)
In the simulations, the probability of apoptosis is calculated every 10 Monte Carlo steps, which, on the time
scale of the timer threshold, reproduces the experimentally observed probabilities. When a cell is eliminated

4
through apoptosis, its target area is set to zero, causing it to shrink rapidly. During this process, surrounding
cells grow to occupy the space left by the apoptotic cell. Within the simulation, this is implemented as:
1. Loop over every cell
(a) Calculate the local density, ρc (eq S.3), for a cell.
(b) Check if the cell dies with probability P(ρc) (eq S.4)
i. If the cell dies the target area and elastic modulus are set to AT = 0 and λ = 5 in order to
encourage rapid (but not instantaneous) shrinking of the dying cell.
In addition to apoptosis, cells can also be eliminated via live cell extrusions. This occurs when a cell’s
area signiﬁcantly decreases compared to the average population area. In experiments [9], extrusion happens
when tissue experiences compressive stress, causing a cell to delaminate from the substrate and eject from
the monolayer. In our simulations, a cell whose area falls below⟨A⟩/4 (where ⟨A⟩is the average area of the
colony) is immediately removed to capture the short time scale over which extrusion occurs [9, 12]. Within
the simulation, this is implemented as:
1. Calculate the average cellular area, ⟨A⟩, within the tissue.
2. Loop over every cell to see if a cell’s area, Ac, satisﬁes Ac < ⟨A⟩/4.
(a) Each cell whose area satisﬁes the above condition is immediately ejected. This is done by
converting each lattice site the cell occupied into medium sites.
Choice of Default Model Parameters
Converting lattice units in the CPM framework to physical units is essential for comparing our simula-
tions with experimental observations. There are two key conversions: translating pixels and Monte Carlo
Steps (mcs) into SI units for distance and time. To achieve this, we compared the experimentally reported
values for average cell volume during subconﬂuence for MDCK cells [8, 13, 14] with the value for average
subconﬂuent colony area in our simulations, ¯ASC = 3200 pixels. This comparison yielded the conversion
factor: 1 pixel = (0.13±0.03)µm2. Applying this factor to the G1/S size threshold, we obtainedAS = 1377
pixels = (179.01±41.31)µm2. We normalized simulation time with the average cycle time of an uncrowded
cell, i.e., the cell’s timer durationτ0. Experimental data for typical epithelial cell types suggest that the time

5
for the S/G2/M phase is approximately τ0 ≈10 hours [8, 14]. This provides the timescale conversion from
Monte Carlo steps to hours, τ0 = 225 mcs ≈10 hr (or 1 mcs ≈2.67 min).
The single-cell growth rate G is sampled from a Gaussian distribution to determine the change in the
target area at each Monte Carlo step (Eq. (S.2)). The mean value ofG is set such that isolated cells maintain
the average subconﬂuent area ¯ASC, G0 = 1
2
¯ASC
τ0
, and the standard deviation is set to 0 .05 G0. While G sets
cellular growth rate (d AT /dt) in an isolated state, tissue crowding reduces the available space for growth
to bulk cells, causing their actual area to deviate from the target area. This results in the domination of
the exponential term of Eq. (S.2), e−k(A−AT )2
, and drives the growth d AT /dt to zero until the cell’s area
increases. The sensitivity to crowding, represented by the heuristic parameter k, quantiﬁes the allowable
deviation between a cell’s area and its target area. The default value, k = 0.1 pixels−2, was determined
empirically to ensure the tissue growth rate captures the expected growth dynamics over several cell cycles.
In our implementation of the CPM, there are four parameters within the Hamiltonian that set the energy
scale; elastic energy has λ and contact energy has Jcc, Jcm, and Jmm. The parameter λ represents the area
elastic modulus for the cell, and we choose a default value λ = 1. The parameter J represents the disparity
between cell surface tension and intercellular adhesion, implying that higher J values indicate lower cell-
cell adhesion. Consequently, we chose Jcc = 6 and Jcm = Jmm = 10, which allowed cells to adhere more
strongly to each other than the medium, resulting in a circular morphology for the growing colony.
Video Legends
Video S1. Simulation of a growing epithelial colony with apoptosis turned off. The simulation uses default
parameters as listed in Table 1. Individual cells are color coded by their growth rates.
Video S2. Simulation of a growing epithelial colony with apoptosis turned on. The simulation uses default
parameters as listed in Table 1. Individual cells are color coded by their growth rates. Dying cells are
colored yellow to highlight them within the tissue.
Video S3. Simulation of a growing epithelial colony exhibiting boundary growth due to strong contact
inhibition. The simulation uses default parameters as listed in Table 1, except elastic modulus λ = 1 and
sensitivity to crowdingk = 1. Left: Cells are color coded by their growth rates, Right: Cells are color-coded
by the cell cycle phase (blue: G1 phase, fuchsia: S/G2/M phase).
Video S4. Simulation of a growing epithelial colony exhibiting uniform bulk growth due to weak contact