Journal of Mathematical Biology            (2021) 83:6 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-021-01627-w Mathematical Biology
Signaling gradients in surface dynamics as basis for
planarian regeneration
Arnd Scheel 1 · Angela Stevens 2 · Christoph Tenbrock 2
Received: 13 August 2019 / Revised: 1 June 2021 / Accepted: 13 June 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021,
corrected publication 2022
Abstract
Based on experimental data, we introduce and analyze a system of reaction-diffusion
equations for the regeneration of planarian ﬂatworms. We model dynamics of head and
tail cells expressing positional control genes that translate into localized signals which
in turn guide stem cell differentiation. Tissue orientation and positional information
are encoded in a long range wnt-related signaling gradient. Our system correctly
reproduces typical cut and graft experiments, and improves on previous models by
preserving polarity in regeneration over orders of magnitude in body size during growth
phases. Key to polarity preservation in our model ﬂatworm is the sensitivity of cell
differentiation to gradients of wnt-related signals relative to the tissue surface. This
process is particularly relevant in small tissue layers close to cuts during their healing,
and modeled in a robust fashion through dynamic boundary conditions.
1 Introduction
Planarians are nonparasitic ﬂatworms commonly found in freshwater streams and
ponds (Reddien and Alvarado 2004;R i n k2018) with a body size in the mm-scale. The
best experimental data is available for the species “Schmidtea mediterranea”, which
is 1–20 mm long and consists of 100 .000 to more than 2 .000.000 cells. Planarians
B Arnd Scheel
scheel@umn.edu
Angela Stevens
angela.stevens@wwu.de
Christoph Tenbrock
christoph.tenbrock@gmail.com
1 School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota, 206 Church St. S.E.,, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA
2 Applied Mathematics, University of Münster (WWU), Einsteinstr. 62, D-48149 Münster, Germany
0123456789().: V,-vol 123

    6 Page 2 of 31 A. Scheel et al.
possess the ability to regenerate after rather severe injuries to their body. When small
tissue parts are cut from the ﬂatworm—in extreme cases just 0 .5% of the original
size—these can regenerate to a fully functioning and intact organism (Reddien and
Alvarado 2004) with head and tail positioned such that the original orientation of the
tissue fragment is respected. When tissue parts are cut from a donor and grafted into a
host, the newly created planarian integrates the old positional information of the tissue
fragment from the donor with the new positional information it obtains from the host.
A better understanding of these processes has a far reaching potential for regeneration
in general.
Here, we present a minimal mathematical model, informed by experimental data,
that reproduces this fascinating behavior. To the best of our knowledge, our system
of reacting and diffusing species is to date the only model that correctly recovers
most of the typical cutting and grafting experiments, and preserves polarity during
regeneration, even of small tissue fragments. The proposed mechanisms resolve a
conundrum in modeling efforts. Many models of spontaneous formation of ﬁnite-size
structure in unstructured tissue so far, allude to a Turing type mechanism to select
a ﬁnite wavelength. Activator-inhibitor systems (Meinhardt 2012), have often been
discussed, for instance in the context of regeneration in hydra, which is similarly
robust as planarian regeneration. Turing’s mechanism however does (intentionally)
not scale across several orders of magnitude, nor does it incorporate robust selection
of polarity.
1.1 The mathematical model
We focus on the ante-posterior (AP) axis of planarians and consider a one-dimensional
domain x ∈[ −L, L], populated by different cell types and signals. Head cells h and
tail cells d generate corresponding signals u
h and ud, which activate the respective
differentiation of stem cells s. A long-range wnt-related signal w, in short wnt-signal,
encodes orientational information through its gradient. It is produced by tail cells in a
saturating fashion, and degraded by reactions with head cells:
∂
t s = Ds ∂xx s + ρs (s) − ph uh s − pd ud s, (1.1)
∂t h = Dh ∂xx h + ph uh s − ηh h, (1.2)
∂t d = Dd ∂xx d + pd ud s − ηd d, (1.3)
∂t uh = Duh ∂xx uh + h2(r0 − r1uh ) − r2uh d − r3uh , (1.4)
∂t ud = Dud ∂xx ud + d2(r0 − r1ud ) − r2ud h − r3ud , (1.5)
∂t w = Dw∂xx w − pwhw + pwd(1 − w). (1.6)
Stem cells proliferate with saturating rate and undergo apoptosis (Baguñ et al. 1990),
which is encoded in ρs (s) = ps s
1+s − ηs s. Stem cells also differentiate irreversibly
into head and tail cells, guided by positional control genes, which are modeled by the
respective related localized signals u
h ,ud . Those signals are produced by head and
tail cells up to a saturation level, with rates r0 and r1 and decay with rate r3.T h i s
interaction works during both, normal tissue turnover and regeneration (Reddien and
123

Signaling gradients in surface dynamics as basis... Page 3 of 31     6 
Alvarado 2004). Head and tail cells result from stem cell differentiation and do not
proliferate. They undergo apoptosis and degrade the signal associated with the other
cell type with rate r2.
The quadratic dependence of the production of uh and ud on h and d corresponds to
higher order molecular kinetics, quadratic here in their simplest form. Replacing these
reactions by ﬁrst-order kinetics, linear in h,d, would result in spontaneous growth of
head and tail regions caused by a linear instability of the zero state; see ( 4.1) in our
analysis and model reduction in Sect. 4 based on tristability, that is, linear stability
of head-only, tail-only, and zero states. The quadratic dependence postulated here
suppresses this instability and we suggest that some effective higher-order kinetics are
indeed crucial there. We used the same parameter p
w for production and degradation
of w, since differing rates showed qualitatively similar outcomes in our simulations.
Finally, random motion of cells and diffusion of signal molecules are modeled through
the diffusion coefﬁcients D j .
Writing U (t , x ) = (s, h,d,uh ,ud ,w) (t , x ), D = diag (Ds , Dh , Dd , Duh , Dud ,
Dw) and F = (Fs , Fh , Fd , Fuh , Fud , Fw) in the system ( 1.1)–(1.6), we ﬁnd
∂t U = DUxx + F (U ). (1.7)
We prescribe inhomogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions Ux =±L = U± and evo-
lution equations for the time dependent Dirichlet data
d
dt U± =− 1
γ D ∂νU |x =±L + F (U±) + B, (1.8)
where ∂νU |x =±L =± ∂x U (t , x )|x =±L denotes the normal derivative. We think of
U± as concentrations in a boundary compartment of length γ where concentrations are
spatially constant. Fluxes − 1
γ D ∂νU |x =±L ensure mass conservation up to kinetics,
d
dt
( ∫
U +
∑
±
γU±
)
=
∫
F (U ) +
∑
±
(
D∂νU |±L + γ d
dt U±
)
=
∫
F (U ) + γ
∑
±
(F (U±) + B).
Kinetics here are identical to those in the bulk of the domain up to a new term B,
present in the dynamics for s±, h±, and d±, that represents a boundary-speciﬁc stem-
cell differentiation mechanism through rates Ψ ±
h/d ,
d
dt s± =− 1
γ Ds ∂νs|x =±L + Fs − Ψ ±
h s − Ψ ±
d s , (1.9)
d
dt h± =− 1
γ Dh ∂νh|x =±L + Fh + Ψ ±
h s , (1.10)
d
dt d± =− 1
γ Dd ∂νd|x =±L + Fd + Ψ ±
d s . (1.11)
123

    6 Page 4 of 31 A. Scheel et al.
Fig. 1 Schematic plot of the smoothed indicator functions χε that detect positive and negative values of
the gradient, respectively, with offset θ and sensing thresholds ε
The differentiation is triggered by lack of head or tail cells, and directed according to
the sign of ∂νw, explicitly through Ψ ±
h/d = Ψh/d (h,d,∂νw)|x =±L ,
Ψh = τ(1 − h)(1 − d)χε
>θ(∂νw), and Ψd = τ(1 − h)(1 − d)χε
<−θ (∂νw).
Here τ ≫ 1 is the rate of differentiation, and the χε are smoothed versions of the
characteristic function, for example
χε
>θ(ξ) = 1
2
[
tanh((ξ − εθ)/ε) + 1
]
,
χε
<−θ(ξ) = 1
2
[
tanh(−(ξ + εθ)/ε) + 1
]
; (1.12)
see Fig. 1 for an illustration.
The steepness ε−1 of the smoothed characteristic function can be interpreted as a
sensitivity of differentiation with respect to small gradients. The offset θ measures
minimal detectable strength of the gradient at the body or wound edge in ε-units.
Overall, the kinetics Fs in ( 1.1) regulate a near-constant supply of stem-cells. As a
result, a healthy planarian consists of a high concentration of h near x =− L, a high
concentration of d near x = L, and a near-constant gradient of w in x ∈ (−L, L);s e e
Fig. 2.
1.2 Boundary dynamics
Differentiation rates in Ψ ±
h/d do not depend on w itself. In particular, concentration
levels of the wnt-related (or other long-range) signal w are not converted into positional
information that in turn directs the differentiation process. Such a direct conversion
of signals is often referred to as a French-ﬂag model [see (Wolpert 1969, 1994) and,
for planarians, (Rink 2018)] but intentionally not used here:
(1) Positional information is inherently incapable of explaining preservation of polar-
ity. Since regeneration and polarity are robust with respect to the location of cut
out tissue fragments, near head, tail, or from the central body region, absolute
levels of w play apparently little role in their regeneration.
(2) Positional information is not necessary in the early stages of regeneration, but
seemingly relevant only later when the size of functional regions like head or tail
are regulated; see Sect. 6.
(3) There is little evidence thus far on the nature of robust biological mechanisms
that would translate wnt-signal levels into differentiation of stem cells. Postulating
123

Signaling gradients in surface dynamics as basis... Page 5 of 31     6 
Fig. 2 Typical experiments and their representations in terms of our mathematical model. T op left:Schematic
illustration of head grafting and regeneration of a two-headed planarian. Top right: Head grafting and
regeneration into a normal planarian with one head and tail. Middle row: Cutting experiment and regeneration
of eight planarians. Bottom row: Schematic illustration of experiments on planarians and associated spatial
distribution of concentrations h, d,w, s, uh ,ud . Homeostasis (left) has head cells concentrated on the left,
tail cells concentrated on the right, a wnt-gradient directed towards wnt-production in the tail, roughly
constant stem cell population with a slight decrease where differentiation into head and tail cells occurs.
Head and tail signals are closely mimicking the distribution of head and tail cells. Grafting (center): The
head region of a donor is grafted into a host, retaining roughly the distribution of cell concentrations and
signaling molecules from its original location. Cutting (right): A thin fragment (here from the trunk region)
retains a small wnt-gradient but no head or tail cells. Regeneration in this context refers to reestablishing
head and tail cell populations while preserving polarity
such mechanisms would simplify the task of reproducing observed phenomena at
the (unnecessary) expense of adding a somewhat poorly substantiated regulatory
mechanism.
Cutting experiments eliminate head and/or tail cells, thus inﬂuence the wnt-pathway
and destroy the associated signaling gradient. The terms B in ( 1.8) model the strong
123

    6 Page 6 of 31 A. Scheel et al.
local peak of differentiation of stem cells (Wenemoser and Reddien 2010), at wounds
inside a formed blastema, guided by wnt-signaling (Adell et al. 2010). This reaction,
which is speciﬁc to wounds with loss of tissue, is not completely understood (Owlarn
and Bartscherer 2016), and occurs in our model in regions at the ends of [−L, L].
We crucially rely on the detection of the orientation of the wnt-gradient relative to the
respective body edge. We view this as an in some sense necessary, minimal informa-
tion, to guide regeneration while at the same time preserving polarity. Looking at the
boundary after cutting in Fig. 2, one readily sees that the sign of ∂
νw gives clues as to
whether differentiation towards head or tail cells should occur.
One can envision several scenarios that enable stem cell differentiation to be guided
by gradients of a chemical signal, for instance through comparing signal strength
spatially or temporally; see (Alt 1980; Iijima et al. 2002). We do not attempt to model
details of this sensing process in the present paper, but simply include a lumped reaction
term for differentiation, that depends sharply on the sign of ∂νw.
We shall see that our somewhat non standard dynamic (or Wentzel) boundary con-
ditions cannot be readily replaced by, say, Robin boundary conditions. Formally, one
could for instance let rates of boundary dynamics tend to inﬁnity or the mass fraction
of the boundary compartment γ tend to zero. In the latter case, assuming at the same
time rapid reactions N1,i n
d
dt U± =− 1
γ D ∂νU |x =±L + N , N = 1
γ N1 + N2 ,
one ﬁnds in the limit the mixed boundary condition D∂νU = N1(U ). In Sect. 4.4,
we will see that, in this limit to “instantaneous” boundary conditions, the model does
not correctly reproduce the phenomena of regeneration. This mathematical curiosity
implies for instance the presence of distinguished body regions relevant in regeneration
and may relate to the concept of poles separating head and tail regions from the trunk
as discussed in Rink ( 2018) where it is attributed a key role in regeneration.
In another interpretation of dynamic boundary conditions, we can think of compart-
ments for the main body on a uniform grid x
(1),..., x (N ), with size x (j +1)−x (j ) ≡ dx
and associated concentrations U (1),..., U (N ) such that individual compartments carry
masses dx U (j ). We now add separate boundary compartments U (0) = U− and
U (N +1) = U+ carrying (larger) masses γU (0),γ U (N +1), independent of dx , and
impose no-ﬂux boundary conditions on this inhomogeneous spatial grid. Fixing γ and
letting dx → 0 we arrive at our dynamic boundary condition. Letting γ → dx ,w e
loose the concept of dynamic boundary conditions and should interpret the additional
reaction terms B as nonlinear ﬂuxes. We are not aware of a systematic analysis of such
limits, connecting discretization, nonlinear ﬂuxes, and dynamic boundary conditions.
1.3 Outline of the paper
We review biological experiments that motivate our model in Sect. 2 and describe
numerical simulations that mimic planarian regeneration in various scenarios in Sect.
3. In Sect. 4, we present analytical results that reduce dynamics to an order parameter c
that lumps concentrations of head and tail cells, coupled to the long-range wnt-related
123

Signaling gradients in surface dynamics as basis... Page 11 of 31     6 
Table 1 Parameter values used
in simulations throughout,
unless noted otherwise
Ds 1 ps 200 r0 18 ηs 100
Dh 10−3 ph 1 r1 12 ηh 1
Dd 10−3 pd 1 r2 6 ηd 1
Duh 10−2 pw 10 r3 6 τ 0.5
Dud 10−2 γ 0.3 θ 3
Dw 1 L 10 ε 2 · 10−3
A discussion on the biological measurements and non-
dimensionalization can be found in Tenbrock ( 2017)
signals uh/d diffuse slowly, while the long-range wnt-related signal w has a diffusion
constant of order 1. We work on domains of length 10 and attribute a mass fraction
γ = 0.3 to the boundary. We assume very fast proliferation of stem cells p
s ≫ 1 and
fast signaling dynamics r j relative to cell differentiation. Cell differentiation ph/d ,
apoptosis ηh/d , and differentiation at the tissue edges during wound healing τ occur
on a time scale of order 1. The production rate of wnt-related signals pw is faster in
comparison.
3.2 Numerical implementation
We implemented the dynamic boundary conditions as time-dependent Dirichlet condi-
tions. The system was solved with grid spacing dx = 0.01 and time stepping 5 · 10−4
using a semi-implicit Euler method. We found little changes from reﬁning spatio-
temporal grids and also used Matlab’s stiff solver ode15s for comparison with
good agreement.
3.3 Results of the numerical simulations
We obtained equilibrium proﬁles starting with initial conditions that represent head
and tail cells in the boundary compartments at the body edges, a uniform distribution
of stem cells throughout the trunk, and a uniform wnt-signaling gradient. Solving
the initial-value problem for a short time, we found that concentrations approached
constants in time. Speciﬁcally, we used initial conditions
h
0(x ) ≡ 0, h−,0 = 1, h+,0 = 0, d0(x ) ≡ 0, d−,0 = 0, d+,0 = 1,
s0(x ) ≡ 1, s−,0 = 1, s+,0 = 1,w 0(x ) = x + L
2L ,w −,0 = 0,w +,0 = 1, (3.1)
and let uh ,ud equal h,d. The results match the schematics in Fig. 2. Figure 3 illustrates
the dynamic stationary proﬁles of healthy planarians of different body size in our
mathematical model.
The linear concentration proﬁle in the wnt-signal is quite robust under dramatic
changes in the domain size. Fixing the width of the boundary compartment γ and
varying L we found robust homeostasis between L = 0.005 (!) and L = 40. For
123